

PEDIATRIC PARAMETERS AND EQUIPMENT
Premie Newborn 6 mo	1 yr	2-3 yr	4-6 yr	7-10 yr	11-15 yr >16 yr
WT (kg)	2.5-3.5 3.5-4	6-8	10	13-16	20-25	25-35	40-50	>50

BAG VALVE MASK

Infant	Infant	Small child

Small child

Child	Child	Child/small Adult	Adult
adult



ORAL AIRWAY Infant
50 mm

Small
60 mm

Small
60 mm

Small
60 mm

Small
70 mm

Small
70-80 mm

Med
80-90 mm

Med
90 mm

Med
90 mm

BLADE	MIL 0	MIL 0	MIL 1	MIL 1,
MAC 2

MIL 1,
MAC 2

MIL 2,
MAC 3

MIL 2,
MAC 3

MIL 2,
MAC 3

MIL 2,
MAC 3

ETT	2.5-3.0 3.0-3.5	3.5-4.0 4.0-4.5	4.5-5.0	5.0-5.5	5.5-6.0	6.0-6.5 7.0-8.0
LMA	1	1	1.5	2	2	2.5	2.5-3	3	4
GLIDESCOPE 1	1 or 2	2	2	3	3	3	3 or 4	3 or 4
IV CATH (ga) 22-24	22-24	20-24	20-24	18-22	18-22	18-22	18-20	16-20
CVL (Fr)	3	3-4	4	4-5	4-5	5	5	7	7
NGT/OGT (Fr) 5	5-8	8	10	10-12	12-14	12-14	14-18	14-18

CHEST TUBE (Fr)

10-12	10-12	12-18	16-20	16-24	20-28	20-32	28-38	28-42

FOLEY (Fr)	6	8	8	8	8	8	8	10	12
ESTIMATED BLOOD PRESSURE BY AGE
Measurement50th %5th %Systolic BP90 + (age × 2)60 (neonate); 70 (1 mo-1 yr)
70 + (age × 2) (for 2-10 yr)
<90 (>10 yr)MAP55 + (age × 1.5)40 + (age × 1.5)NORMAL VITAL SIGNS BY AGEAgeHeart Rate (beats/min)Blood Pressure (mmHg)Respiratory Rate (breaths/min)Premie120-17055-75/35-45 (gestational age approximates normal MAP)40-700-3 mo110-16065-85/45-5530-603-6 mo100-15070-90/50-6530-456-12 mo90-13080-100/55-6525-401-3 yr80-12590-105/55-7020-303-6 yr70-11595-110/60-7520-256-12 yr60-100100-120/60-7514-22>12 yr60-100100-120/70-8012-18ENDOTRACHEAL TUBE FORMULAS

GLASGOW COMA SCALE
ActivityScoreChild/AdultScoreInfantEye opening4Spontaneous4Spontaneous3To speech3To speech/sound2To pain2To painful stimuli1None1NoneVerbal5Oriented5Coos/babbles4Confused4Irritable cry3Inappropriate3Cries to pain2Incomprehensible2Moans to pain1None1NoneMotor6Obeys commands6Normal spontaneous movement5Localizes to pain5Withdraws to touch4Withdraws to pain4Withdraws to pain3Abnormal flexion3Abnormal flexion (decorticate)2Abnormal extension2Abnormal extension (decerebrate)1None1None (flaccid)Adapted from Hunt EA, Nelson-McMillan K, McNamara L. The Johns Hopkins Children's Center Kids Kard, 2016.

RESUSCITATION MEDICATIONS


Amiodarone
Ventricular tachycardia Ventricular fibrillation




Atropine
Bradycardia (increased vagal tone)
Primary AV block

5 mg/kg IV/IO
No Pulse: Push Undiluted
Pulse: Dilute and give over 20-60 minutes
Max first dose 300 mg, max subsequent dose 150 mg Only give max of 3 IV push doses
Monitor for hypotension
Strongly consider pretreating with IV calcium in patients with a pulse to prevent hypotension
0.02 mg/kg IV/IO/IM, 0.04-0.06 mg/kg ETT
Max single dose 0.5 mg
Repeat in 5 minutes if needed (up to twice) to max total dose 1 mg

Calcium chloride (10%) 20 mg/kg IV/IO
Hypocalcemia	Max dose 1 gram
Dextrose	Weight-Based Dosing: 0.5-1 gram/kg Volume-Based Dosing ("Rule of 50"):
<5 kg: 10% dextrose 5-10 mL/kg IV/IO
5-44 kg: 25% dextrose 2-4 mL/kg IV/IO
=45 kg: 50% dextrose 1-2 mL/kg IV/IO Max single dose 50 grams = 100 mL


Hydrocortisone
Adrenal Crisis/ Insufficiency
Insulin (Regular or Aspart)
Hyperkalemia Lidocaine Antiarrhythmic

Magnesium sulfate Torsades de pointes Hypomagnesemia


Naloxone Opioid overdose Coma

2 mg/kg IV/IM/IO
Max dose 100 mg

0.1 units/kg IV/IO with 0.5 gram/kg of dextrose
Max dose 10 units

1 mg/kg IV/IO (ETT dose is 2-3x IV dose) Max single dose 100 mg
May repeat in 10-15 min x2
50 mg/kg IV/IO
No Pulse: Push
Pulse: Give over 20-60 minutes Max single dose 2 grams
Monitor for hypotension/bradycardia
Respiratory Depression: 0.001-0.005 mg/kg/dose IV/IO/IM/Subcut (max 0.1 mg first dose, may titrate to effect)
Full Reversal/Arrest Dose: 0.1 mg/kg IV/IO/IM/Subcut (max dose 2 mg)
ETT dose 2-3 times IV dose, IN dose 2-4 mg. May give every 2 min PRN


ETT Meds (NAVEL: naloxone, atropine, vasopressin, epinephrine, lidocaine)-dilute meds to 5 mL with NS, follow with positive-pressure ventilation.
Adapted from Hunt EA, Nelson-McMillan K, McNamara L. The Johns Hopkins Children's Center Kids Kard, 2018 and the American Heart Association, PALS Pocket Card, 2015.

IV INFUSIONS* 6 ? Desired dose (mCg/kg/min) ? Wt (kg)=  mg drug
Desired rate (mL/hr)	100 mL fluid


Medication
Dose (mCg/kg/min)Dilution in 100 mL in a
Compatible IV Fluid
IV Infusion RateAlprostadil (prostaglandin E1)0.05-0.10.3 mg/kg1 mL/hr = 0.05 mCg/ kg/minAmiodarone5-156 mg/kg1 mL/hr = 1 mCg/kg/minDOPamine5-206 mg/kg1 mL/hr = 1 mCg/kg/minDOBUTamine2-206 mg/kg1 mL/hr = 1 mCg/kg/minEPINEPHrine0.1-10.6 mg/kg1 mL/hr = 0.1 mCg/ kg/minLidocaine, post resuscitation20-506 mg/kg1 mL/hr = 1 mCg/kg/minPhenylephrine0.1-2, up to 5 in severe circumstances0.3 mg/kg1 mL/hr = 0.05 mCg/ kg/minTerbutaline0.1-4 (up to 10 has been used)0.6 mg/kg1 mL/hr = 0.1 mCg/ kg/minVasopressin (pressor)0.17-8 milliunits/kg/min6 units/kg1 mL/hr = 1 milliunit/ kg/min*Standardized concentrations are recommended when available. For additional information, see Larsen GY, Park HB et. al. Standard drug concentrations and smart-pump technology reduce continuous-medication-infusion errors in pediatric patients. Pediatrics. 2005;116(1):e21-e25.
Special thanks to Lisa Hutchins, Clinical Pharmacy Specialist, for her expert guidance with IV infusion and resuscitation medication guidelines.

This page intentionally left blank

TWENTY-SECOND
EDITION

A MANUAL FOR PEDIATRIC HOUSE OFFICERS


THE HARRIET LANE HANDBOOK
THE HARRIET LANE HOUSE STAFF AT
THE CHARLOTTE R. BLOOMBERG CHILDREN'S CENTER OF THE JOHNS HOPKINS HOSPITAL



EDITORS
KEITH KLEINMAN, MD LAUREN MCDANIEL, MD MATTHEW MOLLOY, MD, MPH




Elsevier
1600 John F. Kennedy Blvd. Ste 1600
Philadelphia, PA 19103-2899
THE HARRIET LANE HANDBOOK, 22ND EDITION ISBN: 978-0-323-67407-2 INTERNATIONAL EDITION	ISBN: 978-0-323-67408-9
Copyright (c) 2021 by Elsevier, Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the Publisher's permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).



Previous editions copyrighted 2018, 2015, 2012, 2009, 2005, 2002, 2000, 1996,
1993, 1991, 1987, 1984, 1981, 1978, 1975, 1972, and 1969.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2020932209

Content Strategist: Marybeth Thiel
Senior Content Development Specialist: Jennifer Ehlers
Publishing Services Manager: Julie Eddy Senior Project Manager: Cindy Thoms Design Direction: Patrick Ferguson
Printed in Canada
Last digit is the print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1



To our families
Michael and Debbie Kleinman, you have always been there for guidance and support and have allowed me to follow my dreams. Mary Buckley Kleinman, thank you for being such a loving and devoted wife; you push me to be better every day. Dr. Kimberly Erica Kleinman, you are such
a wonderful sister whom I have always looked up to. Camper Whitney Kleinman, you are beautiful in every way. Ina Zun, you were the perfect grandmother and the reason that I am a doctor; I miss you every day.
Valerie and Richard McDaniel, thank you for all of the sacrifices you have made to prioritize my education and support me in achieving my goals. From an early age, you instilled in me a love of books, a passion for medicine, and an unwavering belief that with hard work and a sense of humor, anything is possible. Michael McDaniel, thank you for being the best brother I could ever ask for and for always believing in and supporting me.
Patrick and Patricia Molloy, thank you for always being my constant supporters no matter where life takes me. Tim, Megan, and Kelly Molloy, your friendship keeps me smiling and has shown me that family is home. Molly Smith Molloy, I can't imagine being on this journey with anyone else. You know me better than I know myself; thank you for all the love, laughs, and acts of service. To my daughters, Maggie and Katie, I am so proud of you. You make every day an adventure and push me to be an advocate for children. The future is yours.
To our patients and their families
We will never forget the lessons you have taught us and the trust you place in us.
To our residents
We are inspired by your brilliance, boldness, and dedication to caring for children.
To the wonderful pediatricians and educators who trained us
Especially Nicole Shilkofski, Janet Serwint, George Dover, Tina Cheng

In loving memory of Dr. Michael Burke

Preface


"Why this child? Why this disease? Why now?"
-Barton Childs, MD
The Harriet Lane Handbook was first developed in 1953 after Harrison Spencer (chief resident in 1950-1951) suggested that residents should write a pocket-sized "pearl book." As recounted by Henry Seidel, the first editor of The Harriet Lane Handbook, "Six of us began without funds and without [the] supervision of our elders, meeting sporadically around a table in the library of the Harriet Lane Home." The product of their efforts was
a concise yet comprehensive handbook that became an indispensable tool for the residents of the Harriet Lane Home. Ultimately, Robert Cooke (department chief, 1956-1974) realized the potential of the Handbook, and, with his backing, the fifth edition was published for widespread dis- tribution by Year Book. Since that time, the handbook has been regularly updated and rigorously revised to reflect the most up-to-date information and available clinical guidelines. It has grown from a humble Hopkins resident "pearl book" to become a nationally and internationally respected
clinical resource. Now translated into many languages, the handbook is still intended as an easy-to-use manual to help pediatricians provide current and comprehensive pediatric care.
   Today, The Harriet Lane Handbook continues to be updated and revised by house officers for house officers. Recognizing the limit to what can be included in a pocket guide, additional information has been placed online and for use via mobile applications. The online-only content includes references, expanded text, and additional tables, figures, and images.
   In addition to including the most up-to-date guidelines, practice parameters, and references, we will highlight some of the most important improvements in the twenty-second edition of The Harriet Lane Handbook:
   The Emergency Management and Trauma, Burn, and Common Critical Care Emergencies chapters have been reorganized. The Emergency and Critical Care Management chapter now focuses on the medical manage- ment of common critical care emergencies, while the management of trauma, including burns, has been consolidated into the Traumatic Injuries chapter.
   The Development, Behavior, and Mental Health chapter has been separated into two chapters with expanded content: Behavior, Development, and Developmental Disability and Psychiatry, reflecting the growing need for pediatricians to understand mental and behavioral health.
   The Genetics chapter has been reorganized to present categories of metabolic disease in easily referenced tables and to provide an organization to different patterns and etiologies of dysmorphology.
x


   The Hematology chapter has been restructured with much of the text re-organized and expanded into tables and figures, including a new algo- rithmic approach to anemia. Content on the management of transfusion reactions has been added.
   The Immunoprophylaxis chapter includes a new section on vaccine hesitancy.
   The Nutrition and Growth chapter now includes expanded content on the management of overweight and obese children, definitions of various degrees of malnutrition, information on refeeding syndrome, and a table with instructions on the preparation of fortified formula. Enteral formulas have been reorganized based on clinical indications.
   The Radiology chapter has been reorganized with all-new images and more focused content.
   The Rheumatology chapter has been refocused for the general pediatri- cian and includes a section on the primary care management of rheumato- logic diseases.
   The Harriet Lane Handbook, designed for pediatric house staff, was made possible by the extraordinary efforts of this year's Johns Hopkins Harriet Lane Pediatric Residency Program senior resident class. It has been an honor to watch these fine doctors mature and refine their skills since internship. They have balanced their busy work schedules and per- sonal lives while authoring the chapters that follow. We are grateful to each of them, along with their faculty advisors, who selflessly dedicated their time to improve the quality and content of this publication. The high quality of this handbook is representative of our residents, who are the heart and soul of our department.
Chapter	Resident	Faculty Advisor
1	Emergency and Critical Care ManagementKelsey Stayer, MD
Lisa Hutchins, PharmDJustin M. Jeffers, MD, MEHP Nicole Shilkofski, MD, MEd2	Traumatic InjuriesNymisha Chilukuri, MDTherese Canares, MD
Paul D. Sponseller, MD, MBA Dylan Stewart, MD3	ToxicologyMaria D. Latham, MDElizabeth Hines, MD4	ProceduresAndrew Percy, MDThuy Ngo, DO, MEd
Erik Su, MD5	Adolescent MedicineChristine Krueger, MD
Harita Shah, MDRenata Arrington Sanders, MD, MPH,
ScM6	Analgesia and Procedural
SedationCourtney Altshuler, MD Kelsey Gladen, MDRajeev Wadia, MD7	CardiologyAoibhinn Nyhan, MDJane Crosson, MD William Ravekes, MD
W. Reid Thompson III, MD8	DermatologyJennifer Reed DiBiagio, MD
M. Cooper Lloyd, MD, MPHBernard Cohen, MD

ChapterResidentFaculty Advisor9	Development,Brittany Badesch, MDAnna Maria Wilms Floet, MDBehavior, andAlexander Hoon, MD, MPHDevelopmentalDisability10	EndocrinologySamar Atteih, MDKristin Arcara, MDJessica Ratner, MD11	Fluids andLauren Burgunder, MD, MPHRebecca Ruebner, MD, MSCEElectrolytesLeonard Feldman, MD12	GastroenterologyMatthew Buendia, MDDarla Shores, MD, PhDNatalie Thoni, MD13	Genetics:Jasmine Knoll, MDJoann Bodurtha, MD, MPHMetabolism andRaeLynn Forsyth, MDAda Hamosh, MD, MPHDysmorphologySarah Pryor, MD, MPH14	HematologyJessica Calihan, MDJames Casella, MDCourtney Elizabeth Lawrence, MD, MSClifford Takemoto, MDDonna Whyte-Stewart, MD15	Immunology andCarlos A. Salgado, MDRobert Wood, MDAllergy16	ImmunoprophylaxisXiao P. Peng, MD, PhDRavit Boger, MD17	Microbiology andKevin Klembczyk, MDSanjay Jain, MBBSInfectiousSamuel McAleese, MDOren Gordon, MD, PhDDisease18	NeonatologyNiana Carter, MDSusan Aucott, MDBethany Sharpless Chalk,W. Christopher Golden, MDPharmD19	NephrologyPaul Gallo, MD, PhDJeffrey Fadowski, MD, MHSCozumel Pruette, MD, MHS, MS20	NeurologyAnia K. Dabrowski, MDThomas Crawford. MDLindsay Schleifer, MDRyan Felling, MD, PhDEric Kossoff, MDChristopher Oakley, MD21	Nutrition and GrowthJaime La Charite, MD, MPHDarla Shores, MD, PhDJennifer Thompson, MS, RD, CSP, LDN22	OncologyP. Galen DiDomizio, MDStacy Cooper, MDChana Richter, MDNicole Arwood, PharmD23	Palliative CareJoshua Natbony, MDNancy Hutton, MDMatt Norvell, MDiv, BCCNayimisha Balmuri, MD24	PsychiatryChristopher Morrow, MDEmily Frosch, MD25	Pulmonology andStephanie Tung, MD, MScLaura Sterni, MDSleep Medicine26	RadiologyBrittany Hunter, MDEmily Dunn, MD27	RheumatologyShani Jones, MDSangeeta Sule, MD, PhD28	Blood Chemistry andLauren McDaniel, MDLori Sokoll, PhDBody FluidsStefani Thomas, PhD29	Biostatistics andMatthew Molloy, MD, MPHMegan Tschudy, MD, MPHEvidence-Based
Medicine

Chapter	Resident	Faculty Advisor
30 Drug Dosages	Carlton K.K. Lee, PharmD,
MPH

31 Drugs in Renal Failure

Elizabeth S. Goswami, PharmD
Namrata Trivedi, PharmD

Carlton K.K. Lee, PharmD, MPH


   The Formulary is complete, concise, and up-to-date thanks to the tireless efforts of Carlton K.K. Lee, PharmD, MPH. With each edition, he carefully updates, revises, and improves the section. His herculean efforts make the Formulary one of the most useful and cited pediatric drug reference texts available.
   We are grateful and humbled to have the opportunity to build on the great work of the preceding editors: Drs. Henry Seidel, Harrison Spencer, William Friedman, Robert Haslam, Jerry Winkelstein, Herbert Swick, Dennis Headings, Kenneth Schuberth, Basil Zitelli, Jeffery Biller, Andrew Yeager, Cynthia Cole, Peter Rowe, Mary Greene, Kevin Johnson, Michael Barone, George Siberry, Robert Iannone, Veronica Gunn, Christian Nechyba, Jason Robertson, Nicole Shilkofski, Jason Custer, Rachel Rau, Megan Tschudy, Kristin Arcara, Jamie Flerlage, Branden Engorn, Helen Hughes, and Lauren Kahl. Many of these previous editors continue to make important contributions to the education of the Harriet Lane house staff, none more than Dr. Nicole Shilkofski, our current residency program director. We are constantly impressed by her enthusiasm for education and her advocacy for the residents. As recent editors, Drs. Helen Hughes and Lauren Kahl also have been instrumental in helping us to navigate this pro- cess. We hope to live up to the legacy of these many outstanding clinicians, educators, and mentors.
An undertaking of this magnitude could not have been accomplished
without the support and dedication of some extraordinary people. First, we would like to thank Dr. Janet Serwint, our residency program director
during our first two years of residency. Thank you for entrusting us with the opportunity to serve as Chief Residents and Harriet Lane Handbook editors. We would also like to offer special thanks to Kathy Mainhart, an invaluable asset to our program. Without her guidance, we would all be lost. Thank you to Dequira Jones and Carly Hyde, the newest additions to our program staff. We are so appreciative of your support this past year. And last but certainly not least, thank you to our Department Director, Dr. Tina Cheng.
We are so grateful for your mentorship and guidance-we are honored to help shape the Children's Center in your vision.


ResidentsInternsCamille AndersonCarly BlattChiara BertolasoCarolyn CraigMartha BrucatoStephanie CramerHaiwen ChenEmily CrosbyZachary ClaudioKevin CrowJade CobernAdam DeLongJames CronkMorgan DruckerMatthew DiGiustoIan DrummondChristopher DonohueKala Frye BourqueThomas ElliottJohn HammondJulie GonzalezMargaret HannahAllison HauptMelissa HirschKatie HesseltonVictoria HuangSunaina KapoorDawn LammertTahseen KarimMegan McSherryAlexandra LazzaraMegan MurphyAshley LeeCole PapakyrikosTyler LennonJoan ParkPaul LoeserKristen PenberthyDivya MadhusudhanMaya RaadTiffany MarkGlenn RiveraThomas McMorrowMichael RoseCecelia MendiolaAmitte RosenfeldBradley MullerNilesh SeshadriAnisha NadkarniLindsay SheetsRuchee PatelAlan SiegelDavid PhilpottSonya SteeleNatalia PhilpottIvana StojkicThomas RappoldDaniel SylvesterHila SellaFlora YazigiLeah SpataforeZachary ZabriskieRachel WeinsteinStephanie WildingShira ZieglerAvery Zierk  Keith Kleinman Lauren McDaniel Matthew Molloy
Contents

PART I Pediatric Acute Care
Emergency and Critical Care Management, 3
Kelsey Stayer, MD and Lisa Hutchins, PharmD
2 Traumatic Injuries, 33
Nymisha Chilukuri, MD
3 Toxicology, 52
Maria D. Latham, MD
4 Procedures, 61
Andrew Percy, MD

PART II Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information
5 Adolescent Medicine, 101
Christine Krueger, MD and Harita Shah, MD
6 Analgesia and Procedural Sedation, 126
Courtney Altshuler, MD and Kelsey Gladen, MD
7 Cardiology, 145
Aoibhinn Nyhan, MD
8 Dermatology, 189
Jennifer Reed DiBiagio, MD and M. Cooper Lloyd, MD, MPH
9 Development, Behavior, and Developmental Disability, 211
Brittany Badesch, MD
10 Endocrinology, 228
Samar Atteih, MD and Jessica Ratner, MD
11 Fluids and Electrolytes, 261
Lauren Burgunder, MD
12 Gastroenterology, 283
Matthew Buendia, MD and Natalie Thoni, MD
13 Genetics: Metabolism and Dysmorphology, 300 Jasmine Knoll, MD, RaeLynn Forsyth, MD and Sarah Pryor, MD, MPH
14 Hematology, 328
Jessica Calihan, MD
15 Immunology and Allergy, 368
Carlos A. Salgado, MD
16 lmmunoprophylaxis, 382
Xiao P Peng, MD, PhD
17 Microbiology and Infectious Disease, 408
Kevin Klembczyk, MD and Samuel McAleese, MD


xv


18 Neonatology, 447
Niana Carter, MD and Bethany Sharpless Chalk, PharmD
19 Nephrology, 472
Paul M. Gallo, MD, PhD
20 Neurology, 502
Ania K. Dabrowski, MD and Lindsay Schleifer, MD
21 Nutrition and Growth, 523
Jaime La Charite, MD, MP
22 Oncology, 546
P Galen DiDomizio, MD and Chana Richter, MD
23 PalIiative Care, 566
Joshua Na/bony, MD
24 Psychiatry, 574
Christopher Morrow, MD
25 Pulmonology and Sleep Medicine, 586
Stephanie Tung, MD, MSc
26 Radiology, 606
Brittany Hunter, MD
27 Rheumatology, 627
Shani Jones, MD

PART Ill Reference
28 Blood Chemistry and Body Fluids, 641
Lauren McDaniel, MD
29 Biostatistics and Evidence-Based Medicine, 653
Matthew Molloy, MD, MPH

PART IV Formulary
30 Drug Dosages, 665
Carlton K.K. Lee, PharmD, MPH
31 Drugs in Renal Failure, 1075
Elizabeth A.S. Goswami, PharmD and Namrata Trivedi, PharmD

Chapter 1
Emergency and Critical Care
Management
Kelsey Stayer, MD and Lisa Hutchins, PharmD

This chapter is presented in accordance with the universal acronym C-A-B (circulation, airway, breathing) to emphasize the reduction of "no blood flow" time.1-3 However, given the high prevalence of asphyxial cardiac arrest in the pediatric population, ventilation remains fundamental to the resuscitation of the critically ill child.4 This chapter serves to function as a guide to caring for "sick" children, spanning the principles of resuscitation and stabilization, as well as management of the most common pediatric medical emergencies.

 I. APPROACH TO THE UNRESPONSIVE CHILD	
A. Circulation1-3,5-10
1. Assessment
a. Pulse: Spend no more than 10 seconds assessing pulse. Assess brachial pulse in infants, carotid or femoral pulse in children.
b. Perfusion: Check for pallor, mottling, or cyanosis. Capillary refill time
>2 seconds is delayed and <1 to 2 seconds or "flash" may indicate warm shock.
c. Rate: Bradycardia <60 beats/min with poor perfusion requires imme- diate cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). Tachycardia >220 beats/ min suggests pathologic tachyarrhythmia.
d. Rhythm: Attach patient to defibrillator or continuous electrocardiogra- phy. In arrest, check rhythm every 2 minutes with minimal interrup- tions in chest compressions (e.g., during compressor change).
e. Blood pressure (BP): Hypotension in a pediatric patient is a late
manifestation of circulatory compromise.
f. Urine output: Normal output is 1.5 to 2 mL/kg/h in infants and young children and 1 mL/kg/h in older children.
2. Management: Initiate CPR immediately if patient is pulseless or brady- cardic (<60 beats/min) with poor perfusion.
a. Chest compressions: See Box 1.1 for an outline of the five compo- nents of high-quality CPR.
b. Monitoring: Continuous capnography and invasive hemodynamic monitoring may guide effectiveness of chest compressions.
(1) Target end-tidal CO2 (EtCO2) >20 mmHg. If consistently less than, improve compressions and assess for excessive ventilation.
(2) Abrupt and sustained rise in EtCO2 is often observed just prior to clinical return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC).

4	Part I Pediatric Acute Care

BOX 1.1
FIVE COMPONENTS OF HIGH-QUALITY CARDIOPULMONARY RESUSCITATION
• "Push fast": Target rate of 100-120 compressions/min
• "Push hard": Target depth of at least ? anteroposterior diameter of chest
• Place step stool at side of bed to assist compressor
• Slide backboard under patient or place on hard surface
• Use the compression technique that achieves the best results
• Consider two-handed, one-handed, two-finger, or two-thumb- encircling hands techniques
• Aim for 1 fingerbreadth below intermammary line in infants, 2 finger- breadths in prepubertal children, and the lower half of the sternum in adolescents
• Allow full chest recoil between compressions
• Minimize interruptions in chest compressions
• Rotate compressor every 2 min or sooner if fatigued
• Check cardiac rhythm at time of compressor change
• Avoid excessive ventilation
• If no advanced airway (endotracheal tube, laryngeal mask airway, trache- ostomy) secured, perform 30:2 compression-ventilation ratio (with single rescuer or for any adolescent/adult) or 15:2 ratio (in an infant/child only if 2 rescuers present)
• If advanced airway secured, give one breath every 6-8 sec with continu- ous compressions
• Ventilation volume should produce no more than minimal, visible chest rise

(3) If a patient has an indwelling arterial catheter, assess waveform for feedback to evaluate chest compressions. Target diastolic BP
>25 mmHg in infants and >30 mmHg in children.
c. Defibrillation: Shockable arrest rhythms include ventricular fibrillation and pulseless ventricular tachycardia. Nonshockable arrest rhythms include asystole, pulseless electrical activity, and bradycardia with poor perfusion.
(1) Use age- and size-appropriate pads as recommended per manufacturer.
(2) Initial shock dose is 2 J/kg, second dose is 4 J/kg, subsequent doses are =4 J/kg (maximum 10 J/kg or adult maximum dose).
d. Cardioversion: A synchronized electrical shock delivered for hemody-
namically unstable patients with tachyarrhythmias (i.e., supraventricular tachycardia, atrial flutter, ventricular tachycardia) and palpable pulses.
(1) Initial dose is 0.5 to 1 J/kg. Increase to 2 J/kg if ineffective, repeating doses if necessary. Reevaluate diagnosis if rhythm does not convert to sinus.
(2) Consultation with a pediatric cardiologist is recommended for elective cardioversion for stable patients with tachyarrhythmias.
e. Resuscitation
(1) Access: Place intraosseous access immediately if in arrest or if intravenous (IV) access difficult.

Chapter 1  Emergency and Critical Care Management	5

(a) If previously established, central access is preferred for drug administration.
(b) Endotracheal tube (ETT) drug administration is acceptable if required. Lidocaine, epinephrine, atropine, and naloxone
(LEAN) and vasopressin can be administered via endotracheal route.
(2) Pharmacotherapy: See Table 1.1 detailing medications for pediatric resuscitation. If actual body weight is unavailable, use length-based habitus-modified (e.g., Mercy method, PAWPER tape) estimation methods, parental estimates, or length-based (e.g., Broselow tape) estimation methods, in order of accuracy.
(3) Fluids: Administer isotonic crystalloid for treatment of shock even if BP is normal.
(a) Administer up to 60 mL/kg of isotonic crystalloid in 20 mL/kg increments in non-neonates during the first 20 minutes until perfusion improves. Frequently reassess for hepatomegaly, pulmonary crackles, and respiratory distress.
(b) Special consideration for cardiogenic shock:
(i) Administer an initial fluid bolus of 5 to 10 mL/kg over 10 to 20 minutes if cardiac insufficiency suspected or unknown (consider in neonate).
(ii) Be prepared to support oxygenation and ventilation in case of pulmonary edema.
(c) Special consideration for septic shock: Specific goals of therapy include ScvO2 (central venous saturation) =70%, adequate BP, normalized heart rate (HR), and appropriate end-organ perfusion.
f. Extracorporeal-CPR (E-CPR): Rapid deployment of venoarterial (VA) or venovenous (VV) extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) to artificially provide oxygenation, ventilation, and circulation as a means of CPR for in-hospital arrest refractory to conventional inter- ventions. Contraindications are limited but may include extremes of prematurity or low birth weight, lethal chromosomal abnormalities, uncontrollable hemorrhage, or irreversible brain damage. Should not be offered if likely to be futile.
B. Airway and Breathing1,7,11-17
1. Assessment
a. Airway patency: Perform head tilt and chin lift or jaw thrust to open airway. Avoid overextension in infants.
b. Spontaneous respirations: Assess spontaneous patient effort.
(1) If breathing regularly, place patient in recovery position (turn onto side).
(2) If the patient has a palpable pulse but inadequate breathing,
provide a 1-second breath every 3 to 5 seconds.
c. Adequacy of respiration: Evaluate for symmetric chest rise. Auscultate for equal breath sounds with good aeration.



PEDIATRIC RESUSCITATION MEDICATIONS5,7,11,17
MedicationIndicationDosingMechanismSide EffectsAdenosineSVT secondary to AV nodeInitial: 0.1 mg/kg IV (max 6 mg)Purine nucleoside blocks AVBrief period of asystole (10-15reentry or accessorySec: 0.2 mg/kg IV (max 12 mg)node conductionsec)pathwaysThird: 0.3 mg/kg IV (max 12 mg)Wait 2 min between dosesAdminister with three-way stopcock rapid push/flush
technique
Amiodarone	Shock-refractory VF or pVF, stable SVT, unstable VT

5 mg/kg (max 300 mg) IV/IO No pulse: Push undiluted dose
Pulse: Dilute and run over 20-60 min
Repeat dosing: 5 mg/kg (up to max 150 mg) up to 15 mg/kg total
Infusion: 5-15 mCg/kg/min (max 20 mg/kg/day or 2200 mg/day)

Potassium-channel blockade suppresses AV node, prolongs QT and QRS

Risk of polymorphic VT, hypotension, decreased cardiac contractility

AtropineBradycardia from increased vagal tone, cholinergic drug toxicity, second- and third-
degree AV block0.02 mg/kg IV/IO/IM (min 0.1 mg/dose, max
0.5 mg/dose; larger doses may be needed for organophosphate poisoning) or 0.04-0.06 mg/kg ET
Repeat dosing: may repeat once after 5 minCholinergic blockade accelerates atrial pacemakers, enhances AV
conductionTachycardia, risk of myocardial ischemia, paradoxical bradycardia with lower than
minimal dosingCalcium chlorideHypocalcemia, hyperkalemia,20 mg/kg (max 1 g) IV/IOBinds myocardial troponinRisk of myocardial necrosishypermagnesemia, calciumAdminister over 10-20 sec in arrestto increase cardiacchannel blocker overdoseConsider calcium gluconate in nonarrest if access iscontractilityperipheral onlyDextroseDocumented hypoglycemia0.5-1 g/kg IV/IORestores energy metaboliteRisk of poor neurologicNewborn: 5-10 mL/kg D10W Infants, children: 2-4 mL/kg D25W
Adolescents: 1-2 mL/kg D50Woutcomes in setting of hyperglycemia

EpinephrineAsystole, PEA, VT, pVT, diastolicBolus: 0.01 mg/kg IV/IO (0.1 mg/mL; max 1 mg) or 0.1a-Agonism increasesTachycardia, ectopy,hypotension, bradycardiamg/kg ET (1 mg/mL; max 2.5 mg)heart rate and cardiactachyarrhythmias,Repeat dosing: Bolus every 3-5 min as neededcontractilityhypertensionInfusion: 0.1-1 mCg/kg/minLidocaineShock-refractory VF or pVTBolus: 1 mg/kg (max 100 mg) IV/IO, 2-3 mg/kg ETSodium-channel blockadeMyocardial depression, altered(second-line after amiodarone)Repeat dosing: 1 mg/kg (max 100 mg) every 10-15 minshortens the duration of themental status, seizures,up to 3-5 mg/kg in first hraction potentialmuscle twitchingInfusion: 20-50 mCg/kg/minMagnesium sulfateTorsades de pointes,50 mg/kg (max 2 g) IV/IOCalcium antagonist depressesHypotension, bradycardiahypomagnesemiaNo pulse: Push doseabnormal secondaryPulse: Run over 20-60 mindepolarizations and AV nodeconductionNaloxoneOpioid overdoseFull reversal: 0.1 mg/kg/dose (max 2 mg/dose) IV/IO/IM,Opioid antagonist reversesRapid withdrawal, agitation,0.2 mg/kg to 1 mg/kg/dose ET, or 2-4 mg INopioid-induced respiratorypain, pulmonary edemaRepeat dosing: every 2-3 min as neededdepression, sedation,analgesia and hypotensionProcainamideStable SVT, atrial flutter, atrialLoad: 15 mg/kg IV/IO, run over 30-60 minSodium-channel blockadeProarrhythmic, polymorphic VT,fibrillation, VTInfusion: 20-80 mCg/kg/min (Max 2 g/24 hr)prolongs effective refractoryhypotensionperiod, depresses conductionvelocitySodium bicarbonateRoutine use in arrest is not
recommended; hyperkalemia,1 mEq/kg IV/IO
Hyperkalemia: Max single dose 50 mEqBuffers acidosis by binding hydrogen ions to improveMay impair tissue oxygen delivery, hypokalemia,arrhythmias in tricyclicmyocardial function, reducehypocalcemia,overdoseSVR and inhibit defibrillationhypernatremia, impairedcardiac functionAV, Atrioventricular; D10W, dextrose 10% in water; ET, endotracheal; HR, heart rate; ICP, intracranial pressure; IM, intramuscular; IO, intraosseous; IV, intravenous; IN, intranasal; mCg, microgram; PEA, pulseless electri- cal activity; pVF, pulseless ventricular fibrillation; pVT, pulseless ventricular tachycardia; SVR, systemic vascular resistance; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular tachycardia.

8	Part I Pediatric Acute Care

d. Distress: Recognize tachypnea, grunting, flaring, retractions, stridor, or wheeze. Infants may exhibit head bobbing.
2. Securing airway
a. Bag-mask ventilation (BVM): May be used indefinitely if ventilating effectively.
(1) Avoid pushing mask down, which can obstruct airway. Bring face into mask.
(2) Consider oropharyngeal airway in the unconscious patient with obstruction. Correct size will extend from corner of mouth to mandibular angle.
(3) Consider nasopharyngeal airway in the conscious (gag reflex intact) or unconscious patient with obstruction. Correct size will extend from tip of nose to tragus of ear.
(4) Cricoid pressure (Sellick maneuver) may be used to minimize gastric inflation and aspiration. Avoid excess pressure leading to tracheal obstruction.
b. Laryngeal mask airway (LMA): Supraglottic airway placed blindly. Useful to emergently secure access to a difficult airway.
(1) Use manufacturer-specific weight-based mask size estimation systems or the combined width of the patient's index, middle, and ring fingers to estimate mask size.
(2) Continuous chest compressions can be performed once LMA is placed.
c. Endotracheal intubation: Rapid sequence intubation is indicated in patients presenting with (presumed) full stomach. Immediately
sequential sedation and neuromuscular blockade help to avert the need for positive pressure ventilation, minimizing aspiration risk.
(1) Preparation: Always have a secondary plan to manage the airway if intubation is unsuccessful.
(a) Preoxygenation: Deliver 100% oxygen via a nonrebreather mask for at least 3 minutes. Children have higher oxygen consumption than adults and can rapidly become hypoxemic.
(b) Equipment: Collect monitoring, suctioning, and oxygen deliv- ery equipment.
(i) If available, quantitative EtCO2 is recommended as pri- mary method to confirm ventilation.
(ii) Place suction catheter at head of bed. Set suction device from -80 mmHg to -120 mmHg.
(iii) Consider nasogastric tube for stomach decompression. See Chapter 4 for placement.
(c) Airway supplies: Both cuffed and uncuffed ETTs are accept- able. Cuffed tubes may decrease risk of aspiration.
(i) If available, use a length-based estimator (e.g., Broselow tape) of ETT size and laryngoscope blade size.
(ii) To estimate age-based ETT size (internal diameter) for patients 2 to 10 years:

Chapter 1  Emergency and Critical Care Management	9

Cuffed ETT (mm) = (age in years / 4) + 3.5 Uncuffed ETT (mm) = (age in years / 4) + 4.0
(iii) To approximate depth of insertion:
Depth (mm) = ETT size (mm) ×3
(iv) Choose laryngoscope blade type and size based on patient age and airway.
(v) Straight (i.e., Miller) blades are typically reserved for children <2 years age or difficult airways.
[1] Miller #00-1 for premature to 2 months age
[2] Miller #1 for 3 months to 3 years age
[3] Miller #2 for >3 years age
(vi) Curved (i.e., Mac) laryngoscope blades are often more effective for children >2 years age.
[1] Mac #2 for >2 years age
[2] Mac #3 for >8 years age
(d) Pharmacology: See Table 1.2 for rapid sequence intubation medications.
(e) Positioning: Place patient in "sniffing" position with neck slightly extended to align the airway.
(i) Infants and toddlers may require towel roll beneath shoul- ders due to large occiput.
(ii) Children and adolescents may require towel roll beneath
neck.
(2) Procedure: Advanced airways should be placed by experienced healthcare providers with appropriate training.
(a) Confirm placement by detecting EtCO2, observing chest wall movement, auscultating for symmetric breath sounds, and monitoring oxygen saturation. Evaluate placement via chest radiograph.
(3) Failure: Acute respiratory failure in an intubated patient may signify Displacement of the ETT, Obstruction, Pneumothorax, or Equipment failure (DOPE).
d. Surgical airway: Consider needle or surgical cricothyrotomy if BVM, endotracheal intubation, and LMA fail. If available, consult emer- gently with difficult airway specialists (pediatric anesthesiologist, intensivist, and/or otolaryngologist).
3. Oxygenation and Ventilation
a. Oxygen delivery systems:
(1) Low-flow systems (e.g., nasal cannula, simple face mask) do not meet the inspiratory flow demand of the patient. Delivery of set fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) is difficult due to room air mixing.
(2) High-flow systems (e.g., nonrebreather, oxygen hood) do meet the inspiratory flow demand of the patient. Measurable FiO2 is delivered.



RAPID SEQUENCE INTUBATION MEDICATIONS11,15-17,20
MedicationBenefitIndicationDosingSide Effects1. AdjunctsAtropinePrevent bradycardia associated withBradycardia in any patient, infants <1 year, children0.02 mg/kg IV/IO/IM (maxTachycardia, pupil dilationlaryngoscope insertion, decrease1-5 years receiving succinylcholine, children >50.5 mg)oral secretionsyears receiving a second dose of succinylcholineGlycopyrrolateDecrease oral secretions, may causeHypersalivation0.004-0.01 mg/kgTachycardialess tachycardia than atropine,IV/IM/IO (max 0.1 mg)preserves pupillary exam in traumaLidocaineBlunts rise in ICP associated withElevated ICP, shock, arrhythmia, and status1 mg/kg IV/IO (maxMyocardial depression, alteredlaryngoscopyasthmaticus100 mg)mental status, seizures,muscle twitching2. Induction AgentsEtomidateMinimal cardiovascular side effects,Multitrauma patient at risk for increased ICP and0.3 mg/kg IV/IOSuppresses adrenal(sedative)minimally decreases ICPhypotensioncorticosteroid synthesis,Caution in patients with adrenal suppression; avoidvomiting, myoclonus, lowersin septic shockseizure thresholdFentanylMinimal cardiovascular effectShock1-5 mCg/kg slow IV/IMChest wall rigidity,(analgesic,push (max 100 mCg)bradycardia, respiratorysedative)depressionKetamineCatecholamine release causesStatus asthmaticus, shock and hypotensive patients1-2 mg/kg IV/IO (maxVomiting, laryngospasm,(sedative,bronchodilation, abatesCaution in patients at risk for elevated ICP or150 mg)hypersalivation, emergenceanalgesic)bradycardia associated withglaucoma history4-6 mg/kg IMreactions (hallucinations)laryngoscope insertion, increasesHR and SVR, produces a"dissociative amnesia"
Midazolam (sedative, amnestic,
anxiolytic)Minimal cardiovascular effectMild shock0.05-0.3 mg/kg IV/IM/IO
(max 10 mg)Dose-dependent respiratory depression, hypotensionPropofol
(sedative)Ultra-short actingRole in RSI unclear
Avoid in shock or patients who require maintenance of CPP1 mg/kg IV initial bolus, then 0.5 mg/kg boluses every 3 min as neededHypotension, myocardial depression, metabolic acido- sis; may cause paradoxical
hypertension in children3. Neuromuscular blockade
Succinylcholine (depolarizing)

Shortest acting neuromuscular blockade agent, reversible with acetylcholinesterase inhibitor

Role limited due to adverse events
Contraindicated in neuromuscular disease, myopa- thies, spinal cord injury, crush injury, burns, renal insufficiency

IV:
=2 years: 2 mg/kg
>2 years: 1 mg/kg (30-60 sec onset, 4-6 min duration)
IM: 3-4 mg/kg (3-4 min
onset, 10-30 min duration)
Max dose: 150 mg/dose IV/IM

Hyperkalemia, trigger of malig- nant hyperthermia, masseter spasm, bradycardia, muscle fasciculations, increased intracranial, intraocular, and intragastric pressure



Vecuronium

Minimal cardiovascular effect, reversible Caution in patients with difficult airway	0.15-0.2 mg/kg IV/IO

Prolonged duration in hepatic

(nondepolarizing)

with sugammadex

(1-3 min onset, 30-40 min duration)
Max dose: 10 mg

failure


CPP, Cerebral perfusion pressure; HR, heart rate; ICP, intracranial pressure; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; IO, intraosseous; mCg, microgram; SVR, systemic vascular resistance; RSI, rapid sequence intubation.

(3) High-flow nasal cannula (HFNC):
(a) High-flow, noninvasive respiratory support provides a heated and humidified air-oxygen mixture that may improve gas exchange by providing airway-distending pressure.
(b) Optimal and maximal flow rates are unknown. Consensus supports a maximum flow rate of up to 2 L/kg/min or 12 L/min for infants and toddlers, 30 L/min for children, and up to 50 L/min for adolescents and adults.
b. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV):
(1) CPAP: Delivery of a continuous, distending positive airway pres- sure independent of patient inspiratory effort.
(2) BiPAP: Pressure-limited ventilatory mode in which the clinician sets an inspiratory positive airway pressure (IPAP) and expiratory positive airway pressure (EPAP).
(a) EPAP is started at 4 to 5 cmH2O and increased to a maxi- mum of 8 to 12 cmH2O.
(b) Set 4 to 6 cmH2O of pressure support, or the difference between IPAP and EPAP.
(c) Consider setting a "backup rate," or respiratory rate just shy of the spontaneous respiratory rate to be delivered in case of apnea.
c. Mechanical Ventilation:
(1) Parameters:
(a) Rate: Number of mechanical breaths delivered per minute.
(b) FiO2: Fraction of oxygen in inspired gas.
(c) PIP: Peak inspiratory pressure attained during respiratory cycle.
(d) Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP): Distending pressure that increases functional residual capacity (FRC), or volume of gas at the end of exhalation.
(e) Mean airway pressure (Paw): Average airway pressure over entire respiratory cycle, which correlates to mean alveolar volume.
(f) Tidal volume (VT): Volume of gas delivered during inspiration.
(g) Time: May indicate a function of time spent in inspiration (Ti), in high pressure (Thigh), or in low pressure (Tlow).
(2) Modes of Ventilation:
(a) Controlled Ventilation: Ventilation is completely mechanical with no spontaneous ventilation efforts expected from the patient.
(i) Pressure-controlled ventilation (PCV): A preset respira- tory rate and Ti delivers a pressure-limited breath (the set pressure is maintained during inspiration). VT is deter- mined by the preset pressure as well as lung compliance and resistance.
(ii) Volume-controlled ventilation (VCV): A preset respiratory rate and Ti delivers a preset VT.

(b) Intermittent mandatory ventilation (IMV): Allows the patient to breathe spontaneously between a preset number of (manda- tory) mechanical breaths.
(i) Synchronized IMV (SIMV): If patient initiates spontaneous breath, mandatory breath is synchronized with patient effort rather than spaced evenly over each minute.
(ii) If spontaneous breathing rate is less than mandatory rate, some mandatory breaths will be delivered in the absence of patient effort.
(iii) Delivered breaths may be volume regulated or pressure limited.
(c) Airway-pressure-release ventilation (APRV): Most of the respiratory cycle is spent at a high distending pressure (a functionally high CPAP phase) with intermittent, short release to a low pressure for a brief ventilation phase. Spontaneous breathing can be superimposed at any point in the cycle.
(d) Support ventilation: Mechanical breaths support patient- initiated breaths, but no mandatory breaths are provided.
(i) Pressure support (PS): Delivers a preset amount of pres- sure to assist spontaneous respiratory effort.
(ii) Often used in combination with other modes of ventila- tion to support spontaneous breaths greater than preset respiratory rates.
(e) High-frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV): Gas flow pres- surizes the system to the preset Paw while a piston moves backwards and forwards to force and withdraw a small VT (that approximates anatomic dead space) into the lungs at rates exceeding normal respiratory rates.
(3) Management: The three subdivisions of mechanical ventilatory support are the acute (lung recruitment), maintenance (lung recovery), and weaning phases.
(a) Acute: See Table 1.3 for ventilation parameter initial settings and titration effects.
(b) Maintenance: To avoid volutrauma, barotrauma, or oxygen toxicity, maintain VT at 4-6 mL/kg, PIP < 35 cmH2O, and FiO2
= 60%.
(c) Weaning:
(i) Assess daily for clinical signs of readiness, such as spon- taneous breathing efforts.
(ii) Standard indices indicating readiness include: FiO2
<50%, PEEP of 5 cmH2O, PIP <20 cmH2O, normalized rate for age, and absence of hypercapnia or acidosis.
(iii) The general approach combines gradual weaning of parameters and reliance on pressure-support modes.
(d) Extubation:
(i) Provide humidified inspired oxygen after extubation.




MECHANICAL VENTILATION PARAMETER SETTINGS AND EFFECTS11,14,17

Parameter
Initial SettingEffect of ? on PaCO2Effect of ? on PaO2PIP=28 cmH2O or =29-32 cmH2O for reduced chest wall compliance???PEEP3-5 cmH2O???VT5-8 mL/kg or 3-6 mL/kg for poorly
compliant lungs???RateNormal rate for age??Minimal ?I:E ratio(33%) 1:2 (67%)No change?FiO2<50% and/or to maintain PaO2No change??between 80 and 100 mmHg and SpO2 =95%


Amplitude (?P)	Set to produce a visible wiggling motion
to the level of the lower abdomen

?	No change



Paw	5 cmH2O > than Paw of previous conventional ventilation

Minimal ?	?


FiO2, Fraction of inspired oxygen; I:E, inspiratory to expiratory; Hz, hertz; Paw, mean airway pressure; PaCO2, partial pres- sure of carbon dioxide (arterial); PaO2, partial pressure of oxygen (arterial); PEEP, positive end-expiratory pressure; PIP, peak inspiratory pressure; VT, tidal volume.

(ii) In case of uncuffed tube or the absence of an air leak at delivered pressure <30 cmH2O, consider 24 hours of dexamethasone (airway edema dosing) to prevent postextubation stridor.

A. Definition: Physiologic state characterized by inadequate oxygen and nutrient delivery to meet tissue demands
1. Compensated: Perfusion to vital organs is maintained by compensatory mechanisms.
a. Tachycardia is often the first and most sensitive vital sign change.
b. Blood flow is redirected from nonvital organs and tissues to vital organs by a selective increase in systemic vascular resistance (SVR), resulting in reduced peripheral perfusion and decreased urine volume.
c. Cardiac contractility increases to maintain cardiac output.
d. Increased venous smooth muscle tone improves preload and stroke volume.
2. Decompensated: Perfusion to vital organs is compromised. Denoted by hypotension, poor perfusion, oliguria/anuria, and altered mental status.

B. Etiology: Categorized into four basic types:
1. Hypovolemic: inadequate fluid intake, increased fluid losses (hemor- rhage, gastroenteritis, burns). Assess for tachycardia, narrow pulse pressure, delayed capillary refill, cool extremities.
2. Cardiogenic: congenital heart disease, myocarditis, cardiomyopathy, arrhythmia. Assess for increased respiratory effort from pulmonary edema, hepatomegaly, jugular venous distension, and cyanosis.
3. Distributive: sepsis, anaphylaxis, neurogenic (e.g., high cervical spine injury)
a. Assess for tachycardia, fever, and petechial, purpuric, or urticarial rash.
b. Warm septic shock is characterized by bounding peripheral pulses, flash capillary refill, and wide pulse pressure.
c. Cold septic shock is characterized by decreased peripheral pulses, delayed capillary refill, and narrow pulse pressure.
d. Neurogenic shock is characterized by hypotension with a wide pulse pressure, normal HR or bradycardia, and hypothermia.
4. Obstructive: tension pneumothorax, cardiac tamponade, pulmonary embolism, ductal-dependent congenital cardiac abnormalities
a. Early clinical presentation is indistinguishable from hypovolemic shock. Progression of shock leads to signs and symptoms similar to cardiogenic shock.
b. Cardiac tamponade is characterized by muffled heart sounds and pulsus paradoxus.
c. Ductal-dependent lesions may be characterized by higher preductal versus postductal BP or arterial oxygen saturation.
C. Management
1. Administer 100% supplemental oxygen initially regardless of oxygen saturation to optimize oxygen delivery. Once perfusion restored, titrate as able to avoid adverse effects from hyperoxia.
2. See Table 1.4 for type- and etiology-specific pathophysiology and man- agement of shock.
3. See Table 1.5 for vasoactive agents to support cardiac output. Vasoactive agents affect SVR (vasodilators and vasoconstrictors), cardiac contractil- ity (inotropes), or HR (chronotropes). Some agents increase blood flow via contractility and vasodilation (inodilators) or increase perfusion pres- sure via contractility and vasoconstriction (inoconstrictors).

 III. MANAGEMENT OF COMMON EMERGENCIES	
A. Anaphylaxis18
1. Definition: Rapid-onset (minutes to hours) usually immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated systemic allergic reaction involving multiple organ systems, including two or more of the following:
a. Cutaneous/mucosal (80% to 90%): flushing, urticaria, pruritis, angioedema



PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND MANAGEMENT OF SHOCK3,5
TypeHRPreloadContractilitySVRManagementHypovolemic???Normal or ??Rapid administration of isotonic crystalloids Replace blood loss with 10 mL/kg PRBCs boluses
Consider colloids if response is poor to crystalloids and loss of protein-
containing fluids is suspectedDistributive? or ?Normal or ?Normal or ?±Administer isotonic crystalloids to expand intravascular volume
Support with vasopressors if fluid-refractorySeptic???Normal or ??Within 1st hour: Administer isotonic crystalloid boluses, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and consider stress-dose hydrocortisone
Warm: Support with norepinephrine or high-dose dopamine
Cold: Support with epinephrine or dopamineNeurogenicNormal or ???±??Position patient flat or head-down
Administer a trial of isotonic crystalloid therapy
If fluid-refractory, support with norepinephrine or epinephrine Maintain normothermiaCardiogenic±????Consider cautious administration (10-20 min) of isotonic crystalloid (5-10  mL/kg); stop if fluid overload develops Support with inodilator milrinone
Decrease metabolic demand with oxygen therapy, ventilatory support and
antipyreticsObstructive	?	±	Normal	?	Correct underlying cause
Start prostaglandin E1 if ductal-dependent lesion suspected
Consider initial fluid challenge with isotonic crystalloid (10-20 mL/kg)
HR, Heart rate; PRBCs, packed red blood cells; SVR, systemic vascular resistance




MEDICATIONS TO SUPPORT CARDIAC OUTPUT5,7,11
MedicationDoseMechanismCommentsDobutamine2-20 mCg/kg/minSelective ß1 agonistInotrope
May predispose to arrhythmiaIndicated for normotensive,
poorly perfused shock
Dopamine	5-20 mCg/kg/min	Direct dopamine
receptor agonist, indirect ß and a agonist (stimulates norepinephrine release), direct a agonist at high dose (>15 mCg/kg/min)

Low to moderate dose: inotrope, chronotrope, splanchnic vasodilator
High dose: vasopressor Indicated for shock with poor
contractility and/or low SVR and cold septic shock if epinephrine unavailable

Epinephrine	0.1-1 mCg/kg/ min





Milrinone	Loading: 50 mCg/ kg over 15 min, then 0.25-0.75 mCg/kg/min

ß1 and ß2 agonist
at low dose (<0.3 mCg/kg/min), a1 agonist at high dose (>0.3 mCg/kg/min)


Type III
phosphodiesterase- inhibitor

Low dose: inotrope, chronotrope, vasodilator
High dose: vasopressor Indicated for hypotensive
shock with marked circulatory instability and cold septic shock
Inodilator
Improves cardiac output with little effect on heart rate
Indicated for normotensive shock with myocardial dysfunction and cold septic shock refractory to epinephrine

Norepinephrine	0.05-2.5 mCg/
kg/min





Phenylephrine	Loading: 5-20
mCg/kg/dose (max 500 mCg),
then 0.1-0.5 mCg/kg/min

a1 and ß1 agonist	Vasoconstrictor, mild inotrope
Indicated for shock with low SVR (warm septic,
anaphylactic, spinal) and cold shock refractory to epinephrine if diastolic BP low
Pure a1 agonist	Vasoconstrictor

Vasopressin (ADH)

0.17-8 mUnits/ kg/min

Vasopressin receptor agonist

Vasoconstrictor
Consider for cardiac arrest, refractory hypotension
in septic shock and GI hemorrhage

ADH, Antidiuretic hormone; BP, blood pressure; cGMP, cyclic guanosine monophosphate; GI, gastrointestinal; mCg, microgram; NO, nitric oxide; SVR, systemic vascular resistance.


b. Respiratory (70%): laryngeal edema, bronchospasm, dyspnea, wheezing, stridor, hypoxemia
c. Gastrointestinal (45%): vomiting, diarrhea, nausea, crampy abdomi- nal pain
d. Circulatory (45%): tachycardia, hypotension, syncope
2. Management:
a. Stop exposure to precipitating antigen.
b. While performing A-B-Cs, immediately give intramuscular (IM) epi- nephrine into midanterolateral thigh.
(1) For child, administer 0.01 mg/kg of 1 mg/mL solution up to a max dose of 1 mg/dose. For adult-sized patients, first administer 0.2 to 0.5 mg of 1 mg/mL solution, increasing as necessary up to max single dose of 1 mg.
(2) Autoinjector dosing: 7.5 to <15 kg use 0.1 mg, 15 to <30 kg use
0.15 mg, =30 kg use 0.3 mg.
(3) Repeat dosing every 5 to 15 minutes as needed.
c. Provide oxygen and ventilatory assistance. Consider early endotra- cheal intubation.
d. Obtain IV access. For management of shock, resuscitate with 20 mL/ kg isotonic crystalloid fluid boluses and vasoactive agents as needed.
e. Place patient in Trendelenburg position (head 30 degrees below feet).
f. Consider adjuvant pharmacologic agents:
(1) Histamine receptor antagonist: Diphenhydramine (H1- antagonism) and ranitidine/famotidine (H2-antagonism)
(2) Corticosteroid: Methylprednisolone or dexamethasone
(3) Inhaled ß2 agonist: Albuterol
g. Symptoms may recur ("biphasic anaphylaxis") up to 72 hours after
initial recovery.
(1) Observe for a minimum of 4 to 10 hours for late-phase symptoms.
(2) Discharge with an epinephrine autoinjector and an anaphylaxis action plan.
B. Upper Airway Obstruction
1. Epiglottitis19-20
a. Definition: Life-threatening, rapidly progressive inflammation (usually infectious) of the supraglottic region.
(1) Most often affects children between 1 and 7 years, but may occur at any age.
(2) May be caused by infection, thermal injury, caustic ingestion, or foreign body.
(3) Most common infectious organisms include Haemophilus influenzae (unvaccinated), Streptococcus pneumoniae, group A streptococci, and Staphylococcus aureus.
(4) Patients often present febrile, toxic-appearing, and tripoding in respiratory distress. Drooling, dysphagia and inspiratory stridor are common. Barky cough is absent.


b. Management: Avoid any agitation of the child prior to securing airway to prevent impending complete obstruction.
(1) Allow child to assume a position of comfort. Unobtrusively provide blow-by oxygen. Monitor with pulse oximetry.
(2) To secure airway, emergently consult difficult airway personnel (pediatric anesthesiologist, intensivist, and/or otolaryngologist).
(a) If unstable (unresponsive, cyanotic, bradycardic), emergently intubate.
(b) If stable with high suspicion, escort patient to OR for laryn- goscopy and intubation under general anesthesia. Equipment for tracheotomy should be readily available.
(c) If stable with moderate or low suspicion, obtain lateral neck radiograph to assess for "thumb sign" of an inflamed epiglottis.
(3) Initiate broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy (e.g., vancomycin and Ceftriaxone).
2. Croup21-22
a. Definition: Common infectious inflammation of the subglottic area.
(1) Most common in infants aged 6 to 36 months.
(2) 75% of infections are caused by parainfluenza virus.
(3) Patients present with fever, barking cough, inspiratory stridor, and increased work of breathing, often worse at night.
b. Management:
(1) Administer oxygen to children with hypoxemia or severe respira- tory distress. Consider humidified air, although current consensus suggests it is ineffective for mild to moderate disease.
(2) If no stridor at rest, give dexamethasone. Consider nebulized budesonide in patients vomiting or who lack IV access.
(3) If stridor at rest, give dexamethasone and nebulized racemic epi- nephrine. Observe for 2 to 4 hours given short duration of action of nebulized epinephrine.
(4) Indications for hospitalization include >1 racemic epinephrine nebulization required, atypical age (<6 months), severe respira- tory distress, or dehydration.
(5) Consider heliox (helium and oxygen mixture) to improve tur- bulent airflow in moderate to severe croup, although benefit is controversial.
3. Foreign body aspiration1,20,23
a. Definition: Acute airway obstruction from aspiration of an organic (e.g., nuts, seeds, grapes, hot dogs) or inorganic (e.g., coins, pins, beads, balloons, small toy parts) foreign body.
(1) Male children younger than 3 years of age are most susceptible.
(2) Patients (<40%) present with classic triad of paroxysmal cough, wheezing, and decreased air entry. Other manifestations include cyanosis, fever, stridor, and persistent pneumonia or notably may be asymptomatic.


(3) The most common location is the right main bronchus (45% to 57%), then left main bronchus (18% to 40%), and trachea (10%
to 17%).
b. Management: Care is taken to avoid converting a partial airway obstruction into complete obstruction.
(1) If not breathing (no cough or sound):
(a) Infant: Deliver repeated cycles of 5 back blows followed by 5 chest compressions until object is expelled or victim becomes unresponsive.
(b) Child: Perform subdiaphragmatic abdominal thrusts (Heimlich maneuver) until object is expelled or victim becomes unresponsive.
(c) Patients should be taken to the OR for emergent removal under direct laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy.
(2) If breathing (forcefully coughing, phonating):
(a) Obtain posteroranterior chest (including neck) radiograph to screen for radiopaque body or mediastinal shift. Consider inspiratory and expiratory films (or bilateral lateral decubitus in young patients) to assess for air trapping. A normal chest radiograph does not rule out foreign body.
(b) If clinical concern is high, consider urgent bronchoscopy or laryngoscopy.
(3) If patient becomes unresponsive: initiate CPR immediately.
(a) After 30 chest compressions, open airway and remove foreign body if visible. Do not perform blind sweep.
(b) Attempt to give two breaths and continue with cycles of chest compressions and ventilations until object expelled.
C. Status Asthmaticus24-28
1. Definition: Inflammatory airflow obstruction secondary to triad of airway edema, bronchoconstriction, and hyperresponsiveness.
2. Examination: Assess breathlessness, speech, alertness, respiratory rate, accessory muscle use, wheezing, HR, pulsus paradoxus, peak expira- tory flow, SpO2, and pCO2.
3. Management:
a. Provide oxygen to achieve SpO2 =90%. If hypoxemia not readily cor- rected with supplemental oxygen, consider pneumothorax, pneumo- nia, methemoglobinemia, or other process.
b. See Table 1.6 for pharmacologic agents used in acute asthma exacerbations.
c. Ventilation interventions:
(1) Normalizing pCO2 can be a sign of impending respiratory failure.
(2) NIPPV (e.g., BiPAP) may be used in patients with impending respiratory failure to avoid intubation but requires a cooperative patient with spontaneous respirations.




STATUS ASTHMATICUS MEDICATIONS24-28



Albuterol	Mild to Moderate: Administer up
to 3 doses in the first hour
MDI: 4-8 puffs (90 mCg/puff) q20 min-4 hr
Nebulizer: 0.15 mg/kg (min 2.5 mg, max 5 mg) q20 min-4 hr
Severe: Continuous nebulization:
0.5 mg/kg/hr (max 30 mg/hr)

Inhaler (with spacer) is preferred
delivery method given equal or greater efficacy, fewer side effects, and shorter length
of stay

Anticholinergics
Ipratropium bromide	Administer q20 min for 3 doses
with albuterol
MDI: 4-8 puffs (17 mCg/puff)
Nebulizer: 0.25-0.5 mg


No additional benefit shown in inpatient setting

















Terbutaline	SC: 0.01 mg/kg (max 0.25 mg/ dose) q20 min for up to 3 doses, then as needed q2-6 hr
IV load: 2-10 mCg/kg IV
IV continuous: 0.1-0.4 mCg/kg/ min (doses as high as 10 mCg/ kg/min have been used)


autoinjector
Consider for severe exacerbation with minimal air entry
IV administration may decrease the need for mechanical ventilation

Adjunct therapies
Continued


TABLE 1.6-CONT'DMedicationDoseCommentsKetamine1-2 mg/kg IV bolus followed byUsed as a sympathomimetic1 mg/kg/h infusion, titratedadjuvant in effort to avoidto affectendotracheal intubationPreferred induction-sedativeagent for endotrachealintubation in asthmaAminophylline6 mg/kg IV bolus over 20 minUse limited to severefollowed by 0.5-1.2 mg/kg/hexacerbations refractory toinfusion (age-dependent, seetraditional interventionsformulary)May improve lung functionand oxygen saturation but is associated with greater length of stay and time to symptom
improvement
Heliox	Optimal helium-oxygen ratio unknown, most commonly 70:30 or 80:20 mixture

Low density gas that promotes laminar airflow and improves ß2 agonist delivery to distal airways
Useful in severe or very severe exacerbations

Inhaled anesthetics (e.g., halothane, isoflurane, sevoflurane)

Consultation with pediatric anesthetist recommended

Rescue therapy for intubated patients with life-threatening exacerbation
Associated with prolonged length of stay and increased cost
Isoflurane may cause hypotension Sevoflurane may cause renal
tubular injury, hepatotoxicity, neuropathy

GI, Gastrointestinal; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; mCg, microgram; MDI, metered-dose inhaler; SC, subcutaneous.

(3) Intubation should be approached cautiously given the risk of worsening air-trapping and difficulty in managing the transition from extremely negative to positive pressure ventilation.
(a) Indications include severe airway obstruction, markedly increased work of breathing, refractory hypoxemia, and impending respiratory arrest.
(b) Ventilation strategies include slower rates with prolonged expi- ratory phase, minimal end-expiratory pressures, and short inspiratory times to minimize hyperinflation and air trapping.
(4) Consider inhaled anesthetics or ECMO as rescue therapies.
D. Pulmonary Hypertensive Crisis11,29
1. Definition:
a. Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is defined as resting elevated mean pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) =25 mmHg in children >3 months of age.


b. A pulmonary hypertensive crisis is a sudden increase in PAP and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) that causes acute right-sided heart failure.
(1) May be triggered by pain, anxiety, tracheal suctioning, hypoxia, acidosis, or respiratory illness. Most commonly described after cardiac surgery or in the setting of rapid withdrawal of PH- specific therapies.
(2) Patients present with systemic hypotension, oxygen desatu- ration (if atrial or ventricular communication present), and decreased EtCO2 on capnography (reduced pulmonary blood flow).
(3) Assess for increased intensity of systolic murmur (worsening tricuspid regurgitation) and increased hepatomegaly.
2. Management: Timely consultation with providers with expertise in man- aging PH is recommended.
a. Implement efforts to keep patient calm. Consider opiates, sedatives, and neuromuscular blockade to reduce stress response, especially postoperatively. Avoid agents that decrease SVR.
b. Administer supplemental oxygen to treat hypoxemia or as an adjunct to pulmonary vasodilators.
c. Avoid acute hypercarbia and acidosis, which abruptly increase PVR. Consider brief hyperventilation or sodium bicarbonate infusions.
d. Diuretics treat congestive symptoms. Avoid excessive reduction in intravascular volume leading to decreased cardiac output.
e. NIPPV may improve oxygenation, treat hypoventilation, and reduce work of breathing. Weigh benefits against increasing patient anxiety and delaying mechanical ventilation.
f. PH-specific pharmacologic therapies aim to induce pulmonary vaso- dilation, support the right ventricle, and maintain cardiac output.
(1) Inhaled pulmonary vasodilators: Nitric oxide
(a) Indicated to reduce need for ECMO in patients with an oxy- gen index >25.
(b) Rapid withdrawal of low doses may cause rebound PH. Gradually decrease dose when weaning.
(c) Monitor for methemoglobinemia.
(2) Phosphodiesterase type-5 inhibitors: Sildenafil, tadalafil
(a) Often used to prevent rebound PH associated with cessation of nitric oxide.
(b) Monitor for acute hypotension or hypoxemia secondary to increased alveolar-arterial gradient.
(3) Synthetic prostacyclin analogs: Epoprostenol (Flolan), treprostinil, iloprost
(4) Endothelin receptor antagonist: Bosentan
g. Consider ECMO or emergent atrial septostomy in case of failed medi- cal management.


E. Hypertensive Crisis11,30
1. Definition:
a. For normal BP values based on age and height, see Chapter 7.
b. Hypertensive emergency: Acutely elevated BP (usually significantly
>99th percentile for age and gender) with evidence of end-organ damage.
(1) Most commonly secondary to renal disease, catecholamine- producing tumors, endocrine syndromes, toxidromes, medication withdrawal, or elevated intracranial pressure (ICP).
(2) Presents with encephalopathy (e.g., headaches, vomiting, sei- zures, altered mental status), vision disturbance, congestive heart failure (e.g., dyspnea, peripheral edema, gallop rhythm), and acute kidney injury.
c. Hypertensive urgency: Acutely elevated BP (usually >5 mmHg greater than the 99th percentile for age and gender) without evidence of
end-organ damage.
(1) Most commonly primary hypertension in children >7 years age, followed by renal disease.
(2) Present with minor complaints (e.g., headaches, nausea).
2. Management:
a. Rule out increased ICP before instituting antihypertensive treatment given critical need to maintain cerebral perfusion.
b. Goal is to reduce BP by =25% in the first 8 hours, then gradual
normalization over the next 24 to 48 hours.
c. See Table 1.7 for hypertensive emergency and urgency medications.
F. Hypercyanotic Crisis ("Tet spell")20,31
1. Definition: Cyanotic emergency secondary to an acute worsening of a preexisting right ventricular outflow tract obstruction (e.g., in a patient with tetralogy of Fallot) that prevents pulmonary blood flow and induces a right-to-left intracardiac shunt.
a. Peak incidence occurs between 2 and 4 months of age.
b. Usually occurs in the morning after crying, feeding, or defecation.
c. Patients present with extreme cyanosis, hyperpnea, tachypnea, and agitation.
2. Management: Follow stepwise approach, escalating if spell is not broken.
a. Make every effort to calm the child. Allow parent to comfort. Consider oral sucrose analgesia (e.g., Sweet-Ease).
b. Bring knees to chest in infants or encourage squatting in older chil- dren to increase SVR and decrease shunting.
c. Administer 100% oxygen if patient tolerates, although effect is lim- ited given absence of effective pulmonary blood flow.
d. For stepwise pharmacologic abortive management, see Table 1.8.
e. Consider isotonic crystalloid resuscitation (5 to 10 mL/kg boluses) to ensure adequate preload if patient is dehydrated.




HYPERTENSIVE CRISIS MEDICATIONS11,30
Drug	Dose	Pharmacokinetics Mechanism	Side Effects


Esmolol	Bolus: 100-500
  mCg/kg Infusion: 100-500
mCg/kg/min (max 1000 mCg/

Onset: Immediate
Duration: 10-30 min

ß1 blocker	Bradycardia,
bronchospasm (at high doses)

kg/min)Hydralazine0.1-0.2 mg/kg/Onset: 5-30 minDirect arterioleReflex tachycardia,dose IV/IM (maxDuration: 2-6 hrvasodilatorflushing, lupus-2 mg/kg/dose orlike syndrome20 mg) q4-6 hrPRNLabetalolBolus: 0.2-1 mg/kg
(max 40 mg)Onset: 2-5 min
Duration: 2-6 hrß1, ß2, and a1
blockerHyperkalemia,
bronchospasm;Infusion: 0.4-1 mg/caution in liverkg/hr (max 3 mg/failure duekg/hr)to prolongedduration of actionNicardipineStart at 0.5-1Onset: 1-2 minCalciumReflex tachycardiamCg/kg/minDuration: 2-4 hrchannel(max 5 mCg/blockerkg/min or 15mg/hr)Nitroprusside0.3-4 mCg/kg/minOnset: 30 sec toArterial andCyanide toxicity(max 10 mCg/2 minvenouskg/min)Duration: 1-10vasodilationminvia NOENTERAL THERAPYCaptopril0.3-0.5 mg/kgOnset: 15-30 minACE inhibitor;Hyperkalemia,(max 6 mg/Duration: 2-6 hrlowers bloodneutropenia,kg/day or 450pressureangioedema,mg/24h)withoutcough;causingcontraindicatedtachycardiain bilateral renalartery stenosis orsolitary kidneyClonidine2-10 mCg/kg/doseOnset: 30-60 minPeripheralBradycardia,q6-8 hr (max 25Duration: 6-10 hrvasodilatorreboundmCg/kg/24 hr uphypertensionto 0.9 mg/24 hr)Nifedipine0.1-0.25 mg/kg/Onset: 15-30 minCalciumPrecipitousdose q4-6 hr PO/Duration: 4-6 hrchannelhypotension,SL (max 10 mg/blockerreflexdose, 1-2 mg/tachycardiakg/24 hr)ACE, Angiotensin-converting enzyme; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; mCg, microgram; NO, nitric oxide; PO, oral; PRN, as needed;SL, sublingual




HYPERCYANOTIC CRISIS ABORTIVE MEDICATIONS20,31
Medication	Dose	Comment


Morphine	0.05-0.2 mg/kg IM, SC or IV; do not
wait for IV access

Calms agitation, suppresses
hyperpnea
Monitor for respiratory depression



Propranolol	0.15-0.25 mg/kg, via slow IV push
Max initial dose 1 mg

ß Blockade decreases heart rate, promoting ventricular filling
Monitor for hypotension


IM, Intramuscular; IV, intravenous; SC, subcutaneous; SVR, systemic vascular resistance.

f. Treat acidosis with sodium bicarbonate.
g. For refractory spells, consider general anesthesia and emergent sur- gery for palliation with a systemic to pulmonary shunt or full repair.
G. Altered Level of Consciousness20,32
1. Definition: A spectrum of impaired consciousness spanning confusion, disorientation, agitation, stupor, lethargy, and coma.
a. Fluctuations in level of consciousness are common and progression may occur rapidly.
b. Coma: Refers to an unarousable state.
c. Lethargy: Refers to a depressed consciousness resembling sleep from which a patient can be aroused but immediately returns to depressed state.
d. Stupor: Refers to a state of depressed responses to external stimuli but not totally asleep.
e. Standard descriptors of level of responsiveness include:
(1) The Glasgow Coma Scale (and modified scale for infants): See Table 1.9 to score level of responsiveness.
(2) AVPU mnemonic: Graded as A if alert, V if responsive to verbal stimulation, P if responsive to painful stimulation, or U if unresponsive.
f. Broad differential considerations include Drugs, Infection, Metabolic, and Structural causes (DIMS).
g. See Table 1.10 for common etiologies and targeted work-up recommendations.
2. Management: Stabilize initially. Further management is aimed at correct- ing underlying etiology.
a. Airway, Breathing, Circulation:
(1) Administer supplemental oxygen to patients presenting with sei- zure or with signs of shock, regardless of pulse oximetry reading.
(2) Intubation is indicated in patients unable to protect their airway.
(3) Consider delaying administration of atropine unless necessary secondary to the loss of pupillary light reflex.




COMA SCALES20
GradingGlasgow Coma ScaleModified Coma Scale for InfantsEYE OPENING4SpontaneousSpontaneous3To speechTo speech2To painTo pain1NoneNoneVERBAL5OrientedCoos or babbles4ConfusedIrritable3Inappropriate wordsCries to pain12Nonspecific soundsMoans to pain1NoneNoneMOTOR6Follows commandsNormal, spontaneous movements5Localizes painWithdraws to touch4Withdraws to painWithdraws to pain3Abnormal flexionAbnormal flexion2Abnormal extensionAbnormal extension1NoneNoneData from Shaw KN, Bachur RG. Fleisher & Ludwig's Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Medicine. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2016.


(4) Avoid hypercarbia, maintaining PaCO2 in normal range. Prophylactic hyperventilation is not recommended.
b. Dextrose: Correct hypoglycemia immediately with a 5 to 10 mL/kg bolus of 10% dextrose or 2 to 4 mL/kg of 25% dextrose. After bolus, start a continuous infusion of dextrose-containing fluids to avoid recurrent hypoglycemia.
c. Imaging: Request emergency head computed tomography (CT) if patient stable for transport. Consult with neurosurgical team if indicated.
d. Hyponatremia: Often asymptomatic unless sodium decreases rapidly or becomes severe (i.e., <125 mmol/L).
(1) Treat symptomatic hyponatremia immediately with a 3 to 5 mL/kg bolus of 3% hypertonic saline over 15 to 30 minutes until seizure activity ceases or serum sodium level is >125 mmol/L.
(2) See Chapter 11 for subsequent, slow correction of asymptomatic hyponatremia.
e. Infection: If presentation concerning for severe sepsis, treat empiri- cally with broad-spectrum antibiotics (e.g., ceftriaxone and vanco- mycin) within the first hour. Include antiviral therapy (e.g., acyclovir) if viral encephalitis is suspected. Lumbar puncture should be performed only if there is no clinical suspicion of increased ICP and the patient is stable.




ETIOLOGIES AND TARGETED EVALUATION OF ALTERED LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Category	Etiologies	Work-up

Drugs	Opiates (e.g., oxycodone, fentanyl, heroin) Sympathomimetics (e.g., cocaine, MDMA) Anticholinergics (e.g., diphenhydramine, TCAs) Cholinergics (e.g., organophosphates) Serotonin syndrome (e.g., SSRIs,
dextromethorphan)

Infection	Systemic sepsis Meningitis Encephalitis Abscess

Metabolic	Hypoglycemia
Electrolyte abnormalities (e.g., hypernatremia/ hyponatremia)
Uremic encephalopathy Hyperammonemic encephalopathy Diabetic ketoacidosis
Inborn error of metabolism Hepatic failure
Renal failure



Structural	Space-occupying lesions (e.g., tumor, blood,
abscess, cyst, cerebral edema secondary to trauma)
Obstructions to cerebral blood flow (e.g., thrombus, vasculitis)

Urine toxicology screen Acetaminophen level ASA level
Ethanol level ECG
Blood gas Serum chemistry Blood culture
Complete blood count Urine analysis and culture CSF analysis and culture
  (if indicated) Blood gas Lactate Glucose Electrolytes Liver enzymes Renal function Ammonia
Serum amino acids Urine organic acids Acylcarnitine profile Coagulation studies Serum/urine osmolarity Head CT or MRI


ASA, Acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin); CSF, cerebral spinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; ECG, electrocardiogram; EEG, electroencephalogram; MDMA, 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (ecstasy); MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; TCAs, tricyclic antidepressants.
Data from Krmpotic K. A clinical approach to altered level of consciousness in the pediatric patient. Austin Pediatr. 2016;3(5):1046.

f. Ingestion: General management includes decreasing absorption, altering metabolism, and enhancing elimination.
(1) Contact the regional poison control center for specific treatment recommendations.
(2) See Chapter 3 for toxicology management.
g. Naloxone: Administer opioid antagonist (full reversal: 0.1 mg/kg/ dose IV/IM/subcutaneous [SC], max 2 mg/dose) if opioid ingestion


is suspected. Repeat dosing every 2 to 3 minutes. Short duration of action may necessitate multiple doses.
h. Thiamine: Consider administration prior to hypertonic glucose for patients with eating disorders, chronic disease, or alcoholism to prevent Wernicke encephalopathy.
i. If patient is an infant or toddler, consider evaluation for inborn error of metabolism, hepatic failure, renal failure, or nonaccidental trauma.
H. Status Epilepticus33-34
1. Definition: Prolonged seizure (clinical or electrographic) or recurrent seizure activity without return to baseline lasting 5 minutes or more.
a. Common acute etiologies: febrile seizures, metabolic disturbances, sepsis, head trauma, stroke/hemorrhage, drug toxicity, inadequate antiepileptic therapy, hypoxia, hypertensive encephalopathy, autoim- mune encephalitis
b. Common chronic etiologies: preexisting epilepsy, tumor, stroke, inborn error of metabolism, ethanol abuse
2. Management: Timely administration of anticonvulsant therapy is associated with a greater likelihood of seizure termination and better neurologic outcomes. See Table 1.11 for timed evaluation and treatment outline.



STATUS EPILEPTICUS TREATMENT GUIDELINE33-34
Management:
Protect airway, intubate if needed Assess vitals
Bedside fingerstick blood glucose
Establish peripheral IV access: administer emergent AED, fluid resuscitation, nutrient resuscitation (thiamine, dextrose)
Labs: laboratory blood glucose, CBC, BMP, calcium, magnesium, antiseizure medication drug levels
MedicationDoseCommentDiazepam0.15-0.5 mg/kg IV (max 10 mg/dose)Monitor for hypotension, respira-(Valium)2-5 years: 0.5 mg/kg PR (max 20 mg/dose)
6-11 years: 0.3 mg/kg PR (max 20 mg/dose)
=12 years: 0.2 mg/kg PR (max 20 mg/dose) May repeat dose once in 5 mintory depressionLorazepam0.1 mg/kg IV (max 4 mg/dose)Monitor for hypotension, respira-(Ativan)May repeat dose once in 5-10 mintory depressionMidazolam0.2 mg/kg IM/INMonitor for hypotension, respira-(Versed)0.5 mg/kg buccal Max: 10 mg all forms
Single dose recommendedtory depressionContinued




Management:
    Secondary AED control therapy Initiate vasopressor support if indicated
Neurological examination CT if indicated
Labs: Liver function tests, coagulation studies, toxicology screen, inborn error of metabolism screening
Neurologic consultation
MedicationDoseCommentFosphenytoin20 mg PE/kg IV/IM (max 1500 mg PE/24 hr)
May give additional 5 mg PE/kg repeat doseMonitor for arrhythmia,
hypotensionLevetiracetam
(Keppra)20-60 mg/kg IV (max 4500 mg/dose)Minimal drug interactions
Not hepatically metabolizedPhenytoin20 mg/kg IV (max 1500 mg/24 hr)Monitor for arrhythmia, hypoten-May give additional 5-10 mg/kg repeat dose	sion, purple glove syndrome


Valproic Acid	20-40 mg/kg IV
May give additional 20 mg/kg repeat dose (max 3000 mg/dose)

Use with caution in TBI
Monitor for hyperammonemia, pancreatitis, hepatotoxicity, thrombocytopenia


Management:
Refractory AED control therapy Continuous EEG monitoring if indicated MRI if indicated
Lumbar puncture if indicated
Consider broad-spectrum antibiotics and antivirals if indicated Intracranial pressure monitoring if indicated
Urinary catheter
MedicationDoseCommentMidazolamLoad: 0.2 mg/kgTachyphylaxis with prolonged use(continuousInfusion: 0.05-2 mg/kg/hrMonitor for respiratory depres-infusion)Breakthrough: 0.1-0.2 mg/kg bolussion, hypotensionPentobarbitalLoad: 5-15 mg/kgMonitor for hypotension,Infusion: 0.5-5 mg/kg/hrrespiratory depression, cardiacBreakthrough: 5 mg/kg bolusdepression, paralytic ileusPropofolLoad: 1-2 mg/kgMonitor for hypotension,Infusion: 20-65 mCg/kg/minrespiratory depression, cardiacBreakthrough: 1 mg/kg bolusfailure, rhabdomyolysis,metabolic acidosis, renalfailure, hypertriglyceridemia,pancreatitis (propofol relatedinfusion syndrome)AED, Antiepileptic drug; BMP, basic metabolic panel; CBC, complete blood count; CT, computed tomography; EEG, electroencephalogram; IM, intramuscular; IN, intranasal; IV, intravenous; mCg, microgram; PE, phenytoin equivalent; PR, per rectum;TBI, traumatic brain injury


I. Increased Intracranial Pressure35-37
1. Definition: An increase in the volume of an intracranial component (brain, blood, or cerebrospinal fluid) within the fixed volume of the skull that exceeds the limits of compensation, generally accepted as a sustained increase =20 mmHg.
a. Intricately related to cerebral perfusion via the following equation:
Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) =
Mean arterial pressure (MAP)-ICP
b. Most commonly caused by brain trauma, tumors, or intracranial infections.
c. Patients present with headache, diplopia, nausea, vomiting, or decreased level of consciousness.
d. Assess for signs of trauma, ataxia, pupillary asymmetry, papilledema, cranial nerve dysfunction, bulging fontanelle, or abnormal posturing.
(1) Foramen magnum herniation: hypertension, bradycardia, irregu- lar respirations (Cushing triad)
(2) Transtentorial herniation: ipsilateral papillary dilation, contralateral hemiparesis
e. Evaluation may include infectious studies, electrolytes, toxicology screen, and stat CT head. Lumbar puncture is contraindicated due to herniation risk if cause is obstructive.
2. Management: Adequate CPP (>40 mmHg) is critical to overcome the resistance of increased ICP.
a. Stabilize initially as per resuscitation guidelines.
(1) Maintain normal oxygenation and ventilation to treat increased meta- bolic demand and avoid hypercarbia-related cerebral vasodilation.
(2) Consider hyperventilation (EtCO2 target between 25 and 30) for patients with active evidence of herniation. Prophylactic hyper- ventilation is otherwise not recommended.
(3) Support MAP with adequate isotonic fluid resuscitation and vaso- active agents.
b. Consultation with neurosurgical team is recommended and required immediately if evidence of herniation is present.
c. Administer mannitol (0.25 to 1 g/kg) and/or hypertonic saline (5 to 10 mL/kg of 3% hypertonic saline) in case of acute neurologic deteriora- tion or cerebral herniation.
(1) Continuous infusions of 3% hypertonic saline (0.5 to 1.5 mL/kg/h) may be titrated as necessary to maintain ICP less than 20 mmHg.
(2) Rapid osmotic diuresis from mannitol may cause hypovolemia and hypotension, especially in polytrauma patients.
d. Request noncontrast head CT to evaluate for emergent surgical pathology.
e. Treat acute seizure activity given the associated increased cere- bral metabolic rate and subsequent increased cerebral blood flow.
Consider prophylactic antiseizure therapy (e.g., phenytoin, levetirace- tam), if transport or delayed definitive care is anticipated.


f. Sedation and analgesia prevent increases in ICP related to pain and agitation, although benefit is balanced with risk of hypotension and alteration of neurologic exam.
g. Avoid secondary brain injury by maintaining neuroprotective param- eters: Maintain head midline and elevated at 30 degrees, normogly- cemia, normonatremia, normothermia, and correct acidosis.
h. If elevated ICP is refractory to medical management, consider draining an existing ventriculoperitoneal shunt or acute neurosurgical interven- tion (external ventricular drain or decompressive craniectomy).
i. For elevated ICP refractory to medical and surgical management, consider barbiturate coma.

 IV. CRITICAL CARE REFERENCE DATA	
1. Minute ventilation (VE):
VE = Respiratory rate × Tidal volume (VT)
2. Alveolar gas equation:
PAO2 = [FiO2 (Patm - PH2O)] - (PaCO2/R)
a. PAO2 = Alveolar partial pressure of oxygen
b. FiO2 = Inspired fraction of oxygen (0.21 at room air)
c. Patm = Atmospheric pressure (760 mmHg at sea level; adjust for high altitude)
d. PH2O = Water vapor pressure (47 mmHg)
e. PaCO2 = Arteriolar partial pressure of carbon dioxide (measured via arterial blood gas)
f. R = Respiratory quotient (0.8; CO2 produced/O2 consumed)
3. Alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient (A-a gradient):
A-a gradient = PAO2 - PaO2
a. PAO2 = Alveolar partial pressure of oxygen (estimated from alveolar gas equation)
b. PaO2 = Arteriolar partial pressure of oxygen (measured via arterial blood gas)
c. Normal gradient is 20 to 65 mmHg on 100% oxygen or 5 to 20 mmHg on room air
d. The A-a gradient is increased in hypoventilation, diffusion limitations, pulmonary blood-flow shunts and ventilation/blood flow (V/Q) mismatch.
4. Oxygenation index (OI):
OI = Paw × FiO2 × 100 / PaO2
a. Paw (mmHg) = Mean airway pressure
b. OI >40 in hypoxemic respiratory failure is historically considered an indication for extracorporeal life support.

 REFERENCES	

 REFERENCES	
1. Berg MD, Schexnayder SM, Chameides L, et al. Part 13: Pediatric basic life support: 2010 American Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2010;122(18 suppl 3):S862-S875.
2. Atkins DL, Berger S, Duff JP, et al. Part 11: Pediatric basic life support and cardiopulmonary resuscitation quality: 2015 American Heart Association guide- lines update for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2015;132(18 suppl 2):S519-S525.
3. De Caen AR, Berg MD, Chameides L, et al. Part 12: Pediatric advanced life sup- port: 2015 American Heart Association guidelines update for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2015;132(18 suppl 2):S526-S542.
4. Atkins DL, de Caen AR, Berger S, et al. 2017 American Heart Association focused update on pediatric basic life support and cardiopulmonary resus- citation quality: an update to the American Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2018;137:e1-e6.
5. Pediatric Advanced Life Support Provider Manual. Dallas: American Heart Association, Subcommittee on Pediatric Resuscitation; 2015.
6. Raymond TT, Cunnyngham CB, Thompson MT, et al. Outcomes among neonates, infants, and children after extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resus- citation for refractory inhospital pediatric cardiac arrest: a report from the National Registry of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2010;11(3):362-371.
7. Kleinman ME, Chameides L, Schexnayder SM, et al. Part 14: Pediatric advanced life support: 2010 American Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2010;122(18 suppl 3):S876-S908.
8. Meaney PA, Bobrow BJ, Mancini ME, et al. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation qual- ity: improving cardiac resuscitation outcomes both inside and outside the hos- pital: a consensus statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2013;128:417-435.
9. Berg RA, Sutton RM, Reeder RW, et al. Association between diastolic blood pressure during pediatric in-hospital cardiopulmonary resuscitation and sur- vival. Circulation. 2018;137(17):1784-1795.
10. Wells M, Goldstein LN, Bentley A. The accuracy of emergency weight estimation systems in children-a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Emerg Med. 2017;10:29.
11. Nichols DG, Shaffner DH. Rogers' Textbook of Pediatric Intensive Care. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2016.
12. Daugherty RJ, Nadkarni V, Brenn BR. Endotracheal tube size estima- tion for children with pathological short stature. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2006;22(11):710-717.
13. Mikalsen IB, Davis P, Øymar K. High flow nasal cannula in children: a literature review. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med. 2016;24:93.
14. Davis PJ, Cladis FP. Smith's Anesthesia for Infants and Children. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Inc; 2017.
15. Bledsoe GH, Schexnayder SM. Pediatric rapid sequence intubation: a review.
Pediatr Emerg Care. 2004;20(5):339-344.

32.e2	Part I Pediatric Acute Care

16. Zelicof-Paul A, Smith-Lockridge A, Schnadower D, et al. Controversies in rapid sequence intubation in children. Curr Opin Pediatric. 2005;17:355-362.
17. Fuhrman BP, Zimmerman JJ. Fuhrman & Zimmerman's Pediatric Critical Care. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Inc; 2017.
18. Simons FE, Ardusso LR, Bilò MB, et al. World Allergy Organization guidelines for the assessment and management of anaphylaxis. World Allergy Organ J. 2011;4(2):13-37.
19. Leboulanger N, Garabedian EN. Airway management in pediatric head and neck infections. Infect Disord Drug Targets. 2012;12(4):256-260.
20. Shaw KN, Bachur RG. Fleisher & Ludwig's Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Medicine. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2016.
21. Petrocheilou A, Tanou K, Kalampouka E, et al. Viral croup: diagnosis and a treatment algorithm. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2014;49(5):421-429.
22. Smith DK, McDermott AJ, Sullivan JF. Croup: diagnosis and management. Am Fam Physician. 2018;97(9):575-580.
23. Singh H, Parakh A. Tracheobronchial foreign body aspiration in children. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2014;53(5):415-419.
24. National Asthma Education and Prevention Program. Expert Panel Report III: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. Bethesda, MD: National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute; 2007.
25. Jones BP, Fleming GM, Otillio JK, et al. Pediatric acute asthma exacerbations: evaluation and management from emergency department to intensive care unit. J Asthma. 53(6):607-617.
26. Dalabih AR, Bondi SA, Harris ZL, et al. Aminophylline infusion for status asth- maticus in the pediatric critical care unit setting is independently associated with increased length of stay and time for symptom improvement. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2014;27(1):57-61.
27. Wong JJ, Lee JH, Turner DA, et al. A review of the use of adjunctive therapies in severe acute asthma exacerbation in critically ill children. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2014;8(4):423-441.
28. Doymaz S, Schneider J, Sagy M. Early administration of terbutaline in severe pediatric asthma may reduce incidence of acute respiratory failure. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2014;112(3):207-210.
29. Abman SH, Hansmann G, Archer SL, et al. Pediatric pulmonary hyperten- sion: guidelines from the American Heart Association and American Thoracic Society. Circulation. 2015;132(21):2037-2099.
30. Baracco R, Mattoo TK. Pediatric hypertensive emergencies. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2014;16:456.
31. Park MK. Park's Pediatric Cardiology for Practitioners. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Inc; 2014.
32. Krmpotic K. A clinical approach to altered level of consciousness in the pediatric patient. Austin Pediatr. 2016;3(5):1046.
33. Brophy GM, Bell R, Claassen J, et al. Guidelines for the evaluation and manage- ment of status epilepticus. Neurocrit Care. 2012;17(1):3-23.
34. Glauser T, Shinnar S, Gloss D, et al. Evidence-based guideline: treat- ment of convulsive status epilepticus in children and adults: report of the guideline committee of the American Epilepsy Society. Epilepsy Curr. 2016;16(1):48-61.
35. Pitfield AF, Carroll AB, Kissoon N. Emergency management of increased intra- cranial pressure. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2012;28(2):200-204.

Chapter 1  Emergency and Critical Care Management	32.e3

36. Kochanek P, Carney N, Adelson PD, et al. Guidelines for the acute medical man- agement of severe traumatic brain injury in infants, children, and adolescents- second edition. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2012;13(suppl 1):S1-S82.
37. Stevens RD, Shoykhet M, Cadena R. Emergency neurological life support: intra- cranial hypertension and herniation. Neurocrit Care. 2015;23(suppl 2):S76-S82.

Chapter 2
Traumatic Injuries
Nymisha Chilukuri, MD

 See additional content on Expert Consult

 I. COMPONENTS OF THE TRAUMA ASSESSMENT	
A. Primary Survey
1. The primary survey includes assessment of ABCDE (airway, breathing, circulation, disability, exposure/exsanguination). This includes intrave- nous (IV) access, preferably two large-bore catheters.
2. NOTE: The Advanced Trauma Life Support algorithm developed by the American College of Surgeons continues to support the ABC sequence in the primary survey. For nontraumatic cardiorespiratory arrest, the circulation, airway, and breathing (CAB) sequence is currently in use by the American Heart Association as part of the Pediatric Advanced Life Support algorithm (see Chapter 1).
B. Secondary Survey (Fig. 2.1)

 II. HEAD AND NECK TRAUMA	
A. Head Imaging
1. The PECARN algorithm (Fig. 2.2) is often used to assess risk for clini- cally important traumatic brain injury.1
2. If signs of traumatic brain injury on computed tomography (CT), con- sider consultation by pediatric neurosurgery/trauma surgeon.
B. Cervical Spine and Neck Imaging
1. There are currently no unified protocols or clinical guidelines for pediat- ric cervical spine clearance after blunt trauma.
2. Based on PECARN C-Spine criteria,2 consider obtaining imaging if any of the following are present in a patient =16 years old:
a. Altered mental status
b. Focal neurologic deficits
c. Complaint of neck pain
d. Torticollis
e. Substantial injury to the torso
f. Predisposing condition
g. High-risk motor vehicle crash
h. Diving accident
3. Note, many institutions alternatively use NEXUS criteria for clinical c- spine clearance. This is validated in children =8 years old3 and includes #1, 2, and 3 of PECARN c-spine plus presence of intoxication or pain-
ful, distracting injury.4,5


Secondary survey






Primary survey

A - Airway
B- Breathing
C - Circulation
D - Disability
(neurological status)
E - Exposure of
patient


HEAD
Head: Scalp laceration/hematoma, skull bone depression /deformity; raccoon eyes (periorbital ecchymoses suggesting orbital skull fracture)
Face: Facial or nasal bone deformity/tenderness, mobile dentition, nasal septum hematoma Neurological status: Glasgow coma scale, sensory and motor evaluation in extremities Eyes:
• Pupil size, symmetry, and reactivity; unilateral dilation suggesting CN III compression and possible
herniation; hyphema
Ears:
• Hemotympanum, battle sign (ecchymosis behind pinna suggesting basillar skull fracture)
• Cerebrospinal fluid leak

CHEST
Clavicle: Clavicle deformity, tenderness
Heart and lungs: Breath sounds, heart sounds
Chest wall: Symmetry, paradoxical movement, rib deformity/fracture, crepitus


NECK
• Cervical spine tenderness, deformity, injury
• Tracheal deviation
• Crepitus

BACK
• Log-roll patient to evaluate spine for step-off along spinal column and rectal bone
• Tenderness
• Open or penetrating
wound

SKIN
• Capillary refill, perfusion
• Lacerations, abrasions,
contusion



EXTREMITIES
• Neurovascular status: Pulse, perfusion, pallor, paresthesias, paralysis, pain
• Range of motion
• Deformity, crepitus, pain
• Compartment syndrome

 FIGURE 2.1 
Trauma primary and secondary survey.


	



Yes 4.4%
risk of ciTBI
No


Yes

4.3%
risk of ciTBI
No











No	<0.02% risk of ciTBI

Yes

0.9%
risk of ciTBI








No	<0.05% risk of ciTBI

Yes

0.9%
risk of ciTBI


	
 FIGURE 2.2 
Recommended algorithm for obtaining head computed tomography in children after head trauma by age. (From Kuppermann N, Holmes JF, Dayan PS, et al. Identification of children at very low risk of clinically-important brain injuries after head trauma: a prospective cohort study. The Lancet. 2009;374(9696):1160- 1170.)


4. Recent guidelines by the Pediatric Cervical Spine Clearance Working Group Algorithm6 additionally highlight the following factors:
a. In patients =3 years old, consider plain radiographs, if c-spine can- not be cleared clinically.
b. Clinical clearance can be done regardless of mechanism of injury if a child is =3 years and is asymptomatic with normal mental status and normal physical examination.
c. Clinical clearance CANNOT be performed if the child is observed to have or reports persistent neck pain, or if there is abnormal head posture or difficulty in neck movement.
C. Specific Imaging Studies
1. C-spine x-ray (XR) with minimum of two views (lateral, anteroposterior, and/or odontoid views) (90% sensitivity in identifying bony cervical spine injury).7
2. Consider further cross-section imaging for further evaluation of vertebral cervical fracture.8
3. Consider magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan for further evaluation of ligamentous and cord cervical spine injury.9,10
4. Spinal cord injury without radiographic abnormality (SCIWORA): Neurologic symptoms persist with no radiographic abnormality. Of note, recent research found that MRI revealed abnormal features only in those patients with complete neurologic deficits and may lack sensitivity with abnormal features associated with partial or temporary neurologic deficits.11,12
5. If signs of spinal column or vascular injury on imaging, consider consul- tation by trauma, spine, and/or neck surgeon.

 III. CONCUSSION	
A. Concussion Evaluation
1. The Acute Concussion Evaluation (ACE) can be used in multiple set- tings (see Section XI. Resources), including the clinic and emergency department (ED).13-15
2. Patients should be referred to a concussion specialist if symptoms persist greater than 10 to 14 days, if they worsen, or if a patient has a history of multiple concussions.
B. Return-to-school and Return-to-play Guidelines (Table 2.1)
1. Overarching goal is to allow healing from first injury in an attempt to prevent "second impact syndrome": Diffuse cerebral swelling in the set- ting of a second concussion that occurred while still symptomatic from an earlier concussion. This is a rare but potentially fatal complication of concussions.
2. Consider providing the ACE Care Plan for parent and child guidance (see Section XI. Resources).
3. Brain rest: Although evidence-based guidelines for brain rest following concussion are limited, current research suggests that extreme rest




RETURN-TO-PLAY AND RETURN-TO-SCHOOL15
Return-to-Play Guidelines	Return-to-School Guidelines










Step 1: No physical activity
Step 2: Low levels of physical activity Examples: Walking, light jogging, light station-
ary biking, light weightlifting (lower weight with higher repetitions, no bench, no squat)
Step 3: Moderate levels of physical activity with body/head movement
Examples: Moderate jogging, brief running, moderate-intensity stationary biking, moderate-intensity weightlifting (reduced time and/or reduced weight from typical routine)
Step 4: Heavy noncontact physical activity Examples: Sprinting/running, high-intensity
stationary biking, regular weightlifting routine, noncontact sport-specific drills (in three planes of movement)
Step 5: Full contact in controlled practice Step 6: Full contact in game play

SUGGESTED SCHOOL MODIFICATIONS:
Shortened school days Frequent breaks during classes
Extra time to complete coursework/assignments and tests
Decreased homework load
No significant classroom or standardized test- ing at this time
Consider 504 Plan and/or Individualized Educa- tion Plan (IEP)



have found that some degree of cognitive rest can be beneficial and that patients presenting with signs of injury following concussion (e.g., loss of consciousness, posttraumatic amnesia) are more likely to benefit from rest following concussion than those patients presenting with symptoms alone (somatic, cognitive, affective, and sleep-related symp- toms).17
4. For further guidelines, please discuss with concussion specialist.

A. Physical Exam
"Seat belt sign" is a significant predictive factor for surgical abdominal injury after blunt trauma (sensitivity 70.6%, specificity 82.4%).19
B. Laboratory Studies to Consider
Type and cross-match, complete blood cell count (CBC; low hemoglobin indicates possible hemorrhage; however, this is a late sign), electrolytes,


liver function tests (high AST/ALT indicate liver injury), lipase (high level indicates pancreatic injury), and urinalysis (hematuria indicates possible renal/bladder injury).
C. Imaging Studies to Consider
1. Chest radiograph
a. Look for rib fracture, pneumothorax and/or hemothorax, pulmonary contusion, pneumomediastinum.
b. Consider chest CT with IV contrast, if recommended by radiologist and/or trauma surgeon.
2. Pelvis radiograph
a. Look for pelvis fracture.
b. Consider pelvis CT if recommended by radiologist and/or trauma surgeon.
3. Abdominal/pelvis CT with IV contrast
a. This is the "gold standard" for intra-abdominal injury diagnosis; however, radiographs should be obtained first if there is concern for additional injuries that would compromise clinical stability.
b. For blunt abdominal trauma, routine oral contrast is not indicated, whereas IV contrast can help to identify visceral, vascular, or bowel injury.20
c. For penetrating abdominal trauma, triple contrast (oral, rectal, IV) CT to identify peritoneal penetration or intra-abdominal organ injury in stable stab wound victims.21
d. Look for duodenal hematoma, hemoperitoneum, bladder injury, solid organ hemorrhage (e.g., spleen and/or liver).
e. If gross hematuria or urinalysis with greater than 50 RBC/hpf, con- sider genitourinary tract trauma and consider CT abdomen and pel- vis with and without IV contrast (CT urography) and CT cystogram, in consultation with radiology/urologist/trauma surgeon.
4. Extended focused assessment with sonography for trauma (eFAST)
a. Can help to identify intra-abdominal free fluid and parenchymal injury (sensitivity 50%, specificity 85%).22
b. eFAST with bilateral anterior lung views is highly sensitive for pneu- mothorax.
c. Consider performing if qualified personnel available.
5. If any workup is positive for thoracic or abdominal trauma, immediate consultation with nearest pediatric trauma center/surgeon is indicated.

 V. ORTHOPEDIC/LONG BONE TRAUMA	
A. Physical Exam
1. Look for swelling, ecchymosis, or deformity. Look for breaks in the skin (abrasions, lacerations) overlying the apex of the fracture suggestive of open fracture.
2. Bleeding
a. Consider arterial bleed if absent pulses and cool extremity with bleeding.
b. Consider venous bleed if persistent pulse with bleeding.


3. Compartment syndrome: Tense, swollen area at site of injury, pain, paresthesia, paresis, pallor, pulselessness (if unable to palpate pulse, consider using vascular ultrasound with Doppler).
4. If signs/symptoms of compartment syndrome or open fracture, consul- tation with a pediatric orthopedic surgeon is recommended.
B. Imaging
1. Children's bones are less densely calcified, have thickened periosteum, and have a growth plate, all of which increase their vulnerability to fractures.
2. Obtain radiographs if bony point tenderness or deformity, decreased sensation, decreased range of motion, or overlying skin discoloration.
3. Radiographs with anterior-posterior and lateral views ± oblique and including areas above and below the suspected area of injury are rec- ommended.
C. Fractures Unique to Children
1. Physeal or Salter-Harris fractures18: Fractures involving growth plates (see Chapter 26).
2. Plastic fractures: Pliability of bones in response to compressive and transverse forces.
a. Torus or buckle fracture: Compression injury with buckled cortex
b. Greenstick fracture: Fracture on one side of the diaphysis with cortex intact on other side of diaphysis
c. Bowing or bending fractures
3. Avulsion fractures: Tendon or ligament dislodging a bone fragment. These are more common among adolescents participating in sports.
D. Fractures Requiring Urgent Orthopedic Surgeon Consultation
1. Open fractures
2. Unacceptably displaced fractures
3. Fractures with associated neurovascular compromise (consider emer- gent reduction to improve neurovascular status if orthopedic surgery is not available on-site)
4. Significant growth plate or joint injuries
5. Complete or displaced fractures of the long bones of the extremities
6. Pelvic fractures (other than minor avulsions)
7. Spinal fractures
8. Dislocations of major joints other than the shoulder
E. Fractures That Are Appropriate to Manage Acutely With Outpatient Referral to Orthopedics (Table 2.2)

 VI. DENTAL TRAUMA	
A. Components of a Tooth (Fig. 2.3)
B. Differences Between Primary and Permanent Teeth (Fig. 2.4)
1. Primary teeth appear 6 months to 3 years of age, are relatively smaller, whiter, front teeth have a smooth biting surface.




COMMON PEDIATRIC ORTHOPEDIC INJURIES AND MANAGEMENT
InjuryED ManagementFollow-upClavicle fracture without tenting or displacement (if present, orthopedic surgery consultation required)SlingPrimary care provider in 2 weeksAcromioclavicular joint separationSlingOrthopedics in 1 weekProximal humerus fracture WITHOUT defor-
mity, displacement, neurovascular injurySlingOrthopedics within 1 weekDistal radius or ulna fracture WITHOUTVolar splintOrthopedics within 1 weekdeformity, displacement, neurovascular injury

Salter-Harris Type 1-Distal fibula	Posterior splint, crutches Orthopedics within 1 week

 FIGURE 2.3 
Normal anatomy of a tooth. (Modified from Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Medicine.18)

2. Permanent teeth appear 6 years to 21 years of age, relatively larger, front teeth have a ridged biting surface.
C. Dental Injuries
1. Avulsion
a. An avulsion injury involves complete displacement of the tooth from the alveolar socket.23
b. If a primary tooth, outpatient dental follow-up is appropriate.
c. If a permanent tooth, this is a dental emergency!



















 FIGURE 2.4 
Development from primary to permanent teeth by location. (Modified from American Dental Association. www.mouthhealthy.org)

d. Most important: Immediate reimplantation should occur within 60 minutes to maximize tooth viability. Without a tooth present, the peri- odontal ligament can degenerate.
e. Method:
(1) Pick up the avulsed tooth by the crown and avoid touching the root to prevent injury to the periodontal ligament.
(2) Wash the tooth briefly with saline or Hanks Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS).
(3) Administer local lidocaine into the gum if time permitting.
(4) Insert the root into the alveolar socket with concave part facing the tongue.
(5) Ask the patient to bite on gauze to hold it in position.
(6) Refer to a dentist emergently for splinting.
f. Reimplantation should always be attempted. If reimplantation is not possible, place the tooth in a container in osmolality balanced media (e.g., HBSS, cold milk) and refer to a dentist emergently for reimplan- tation and splinting.
2. Luxation
a. Luxation injuries result from physical displacement of tooth within the alveolar socket, tearing of the periodontal ligament with possible injury to the alveolar bone.24




TOOTH FRACTURE TYPES AND FOLLOW-UP RECOMMENDATIONS24,25
Fracture Type	Follow-up recommendations

Enamel-Dentin Fracture	Dental evaluation 48-72 hr to place a dressing of calcium
hydroxide to prevent injury to the pulp
Alveolar Ridge Fracture	Emergent dental evaluation


b. Primary tooth: If tooth is loose, there is an increased risk of aspira- tion, and the tooth may be extracted with firm pressure with gauze. If tooth is not loose, may need repositioning and splinting. In both situations, refer to a dentist for evaluation within 48 hours.
c. Permanent tooth: Immediate dental evaluation required if significant tooth mobility; otherwise, outpatient evaluation within 48 hours is appropriate.
3. Subluxation
a. Subluxation is characterized by tooth injury with minor mobility with- out displacement.
b. Regardless of whether permanent or primary tooth, outpatient dental follow-up, ideally within 48 hours, is needed to rule out root fracture.
4. Tooth fracture:
a. Classify the fracture per involvement of enamel, dentin, and pulp.25
b. For management guidelines: Table 2.3.
D. Anticipatory Guidance Following Dental Trauma
1. Avoid contact sports
2. Analgesics as needed for pain control (e.g., acetaminophen, ibuprofen, cold compresses)
3. Soft diet
4. Use a soft toothbrush, if able to brush teeth
5. Regular follow-up with a dentist

A. Chemical Injury to the Eye18
1. Determine if substance is an acid or alkali. Alkali solutions tend to be more damaging because they penetrate more deeply.
2. Obtain a baseline pH by touching Litmus paper to the conjunctiva.
3. Retract eye lids as much as possible and irrigate immediately with normal saline or lactated Ringer solution. This can be performed at the eyewash station or with a standard bag of fluid with tubing placed at the medial canthus. Allow the liquid to pass over the open eye to the lateral canthus.


4. Continue irrigation for a minimum of 30 minutes with minimum 1 to 2 L of solution or until pH becomes neutral (7.0 to 7.4). Additional fluid may be required.
5. Monitor conjunctival pH with Litmus paper 10 to 20 minutes after irrigation.27
6. Consider ophthalmologic consultation and discuss with Poison Control.
B. Ruptured Globe
1. A ruptured globe is caused by laceration or puncture of the cornea and/or sclera following trauma caused by projectile, sharp, or blunt trauma.
2. Key physical exam findings include: Teardrop shaped pupil pointing to- wards perforation, hyphema (hemorrhage in the anterior chamber) and/ or subconjunctival hemorrhage, severe pain, decreased visual acuity, edema.
3. Stop the exam and place a rigid eye shield.
4. Elevate the head of the bed.
5. Keep patient as calm as possible and control symptoms (e.g., antiemet- ics and pain control) to avoid increased globe pressure and further extrusion of vitreous/aqueous humor.
6. Immediately consult ophthalmology and administer antibiotics.
C. Corneal Abrasion
1. Key physical exam findings include red eye with tearing, intense pain, resistance to eye opening, photophobia, foreign body sensation.
2. Consider application of topical anesthetic before examination. If foreign body sensation is present on your exam, evert eyelids to look for re- tained foreign body.
3. Apply fluorescein staining and examine with Wood lamp. Focal uptake indicates abrasion.
4. Consider ophthalmic ointment or artificial tears for lubrication and pain relief.
5. Consider ophthalmologic consultation in the ED if concern for larger corneal abrasions involving visual axis, corneal laceration, ulceration, embedded foreign body, or prolonged healing (i.e., symptoms not improving after several days).
D. Superglue to the Eye28
1. Trim eyelashes as needed with blunt-tip scissors.
2. Apply copious amounts of ointment, such as bacitracin ophthalmic ointment or baby shampoo, and gently massage eyelashes to break down the glue. Advise that the patient continue this as often as possible. Dissolution of glue may take several days.
3. Consider consultation with ophthalmology if several days of ointment is unsuccessful.
E. Eyelid Laceration
1. Consider consultation with ophthalmology if: Full-thickness lacerations (exposed adipose tissue), laceration through the lid margin or tarsal plate,


lacerations involving lacrimal canaliculi (medial third of the upper/lower lids), or ptosis (unequal lifting of lids with upward gaze would suggest this).
2. Some superficial lacerations that occur in the direction of a natural skin fold may not require repair.
F. Orbital Floor Fractures
1. This injury is usually caused by blunt trauma and is often referred to as a "blow out fracture," because the weakest area of the orbital bones is the orbital floor/maxillary roof.
2. Key physical exam findings include: Eyelid swelling, ecchymosis, enophthalmos of affected eye, ptosis, diplopia, anesthesia of the cheek (involvement of infraorbital nerve), decreased extraocular eye move- ments (especially decreased superior range of the globe due to inferior rectus entrapment).
3. Evaluate for other eye injuries (e.g., retinal trauma, ruptured globe).
4. Consider consultation with ophthalmology and plastics/otorhinolaryngol- ogy surgeon.
G. Other Instances Requiring Ophthalmologic Consultation
1. Traumatic iritis is associated with blunt trauma with painful red eye, pupillary constriction, and photophobia, often with delayed presentation of symptoms (24 to 72 hours) after trauma.
2. Sudden loss of vision could suggest retrobulbar hemorrhage or retinal detachment.

 VIII. ANIMAL BITES	
A. Wounds at the Highest Risk of Infection
1. Bites over hand, foot, genitalia, or joint surface
2. Bites from a cat or human
3. Wounds in an asplenic or immunocompromised patient
4. Wounds with delayed presentation to care >12 hours
B. Decision to Suture
1. Avoid closing wounds at high risk of infection (see earlier) unless for cosmetic reasons, large wounds or wounds with edges far apart where loose approximation can be helpful.
2. Wounds on head and neck can be safely sutured after copious irrigation and wound débridement if within 6 to 8 hours of injury and there are no signs of infection. Avoid skin glue due to high risk of infection.
3. In large wounds, subcutaneous dead space should be closed with a minimal number of absorbable sutures, with delayed closure in 3 to 5 days, if there is no evidence of infection.
4. Wounds that involve tendons, joints, deep fascia, or major vasculature should be evaluated by a surgeon.
C. Antibiotic Prophylaxis29
1. Table 2.4.




ANTIBIOTIC MANAGEMENT OF ANIMAL AND HUMAN BITES
Type of Bite	Organisms	Treatment



Human bite	Streptococcus viridans, S. aureus,
Oral Anaerobes, Eikenella corrodens

Amoxicillin/clavulanate for 5 days Clindamycin AND ciprofloxacin, if
allergy to penicillin



2. Consider IV antibiotics if patient is critically ill or unable to tolerate PO intake.
D. Tetanus Postexposure Prophylaxis: See Chapter 16
E. Rabies Postexposure Prophylaxis: See Chapter 16

A. Burns That Should Prompt Consideration of Elective Intubation
1. Signs of inhalational injury (e.g., singed nasal hairs, soot at the nares, oropharyngeal erythema)
2. Early onset stridor
3. Severe burns of face and/or mouth
4. Progressive respiratory insufficiency
B. Estimation of the Surface Area of Burns
1. See Fig. 2.5.
2. Only include partial- and full-thickness burns and exclude superficial burns in the calculation of body surface area.
C. Estimation of the Depth of Burns (Table 2.5)
D. Fluid Resuscitation in Patients With Burns (Fig. 2.6)
1. Consider central venous access for burns greater than 25% BSA.
2. Withhold potassium from IV fluids generally for the first 48 hours be- cause of a large release of potassium from damaged tissues.
3. Foley catheter placement is recommended to monitor urine output dur- ing fluid resuscitation phase.
E. Indications for Transfer to a Burn Center30
1. =10% partial-thickness and/or full-thickness burns
2. =5% full-thickness burns
3. If burn débridement is warranted (e.g., any partial-thickness burn >2
cm in diameter)
4. Respiratory involvement and/or major trauma
5. Electrical, chemical, or inhalation injury
6. Burns of critical areas, such as face, hands, feet, perineum, or joints
7. Circumferential burns



A
A


13	13
2	2	2	2



1.5

1.5


1.5


1.5



1.5	1
B	B


1.5


1.5


2.5  2.5

B	B


1.5


C	C
C	C
1.75	1.75


1.75
(sole)



1.75
(heel)



1.75
(heel)

1.75
(sole)


<1 yr1 yr5 yr10 yr15 yrAdultA Front or back of head9.58.56.55.54.53.5B Front or back of thigh2.753.2544.254.54.75C Front or back of leg2.52.52.7533.253.5
 FIGURE 2.5 
Burn assessment chart. All numbers are percentages. (Modified from Barkin RM, Rosen P. Emergency Pediatrics: A Guide to Ambulatory Care. 6th ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 2003.)

8. Patient with underlying chronic illness
9. Suspicion of abuse or unsafe home environment
F. Management of Burns Not Referred to Burn Center
1. For a partial-thickness burn not requiring débridement:
a. Clean with warm saline or mild soap and water.
b. Apply topical antibacterial agent such as bacitracin (requires daily dressing changes) or silver-impregnated dressings (dressing can be




BURN CLASSIFICATION
Wound Depth	Layer Involved	Clinical Findings
Superficial	Epidermis	Dry, painful, erythematous (like a sunburn) Partial Thickness	Dermis	Moist, painful, erythematous
Blistering present, blanches
Disruption of nails, hair, sebaceous glands

Full Thickness	Subcutaneous, fascia,
muscle, bone

Pale, charred, waxy, leathery, insensate No bleeding or blanching



 FIGURE 2.6 
Formulaic fluid resuscitation for pediatric burns.18

left in place until follow-up) and cover with nonadherent dressing.
2. Follow-up inspections of wound should occur at 24 and 72 hours.
3. Follow-up within one week at a pediatric burn center is highly recommended.
4. Oral antibiotics are not indicated.
G. Other Special Considerations With Burns
1. Circumferential burns can increase risk of compartment syndrome.
2. Tetanus prophylaxis is warranted with burns. Refer to Chapter 16 for details.
H. Other Types of Burns
1. Household electrical burn31: In general, household outlets are 120 to 240 V and rarely cause serious injuries or cardiac arrhythmias.
2. High-voltage burns (>1000 V), including lightning burns:
a. Patients are at increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias or asystole.
Consider cardiac monitoring for 48 hours.31
b. Patients are also at increased risk of compression spine fractures or


spinal cord injury due to tetany, as well as compartment syndrome, rhabdomyolysis, and hyperkalemia due to muscle swelling.

 X. NONACCIDENTAL TRAUMA	
A. Physical Abuse
1. Red flags in history
a. Delay in presentation
b. Inconsistent/incomplete/vague/changing explanations for significant injury
c. History is inconsistent with age, pattern, or severity of the injury
d. History is inconsistent with child's physical or developmental capabilities
e. Different witnesses provide different explanation
2. Concerning physical exam findings32
a. Bruises: In protected areas (chest, abdomen, back, buttocks), mul- tiple, in various stages of healing, those that do not fit history or devel- opmental stage of child, in unusual places (e.g., postauricular, neck, inner aspect of arms), those consistent with slap of hand or pinch.
b. Burns: Multiple, well-demarcated, stocking/glove distribution, sym- metrically burned palms/soles, buttocks and/or lower legs, mirror image burns of extremities, spared inguinal or other flexural creases, appearance of a cigarette burn.
c. Other: Frenulum tears, loop marks from cord or cable, bites.
d. See Figs. 2.7-2.10 (color plates) and Figs. EC 2.A-D for examples.
3. Imaging guidelines
a. Skeletal survey33-35
(1) In children less than 2 years of age, use skeletal survey to evalu- ate for bony injury. This includes frontal and lateral views of the skull, lateral views of the cervical spine and thoracolumbosacral spine, and single frontal views of the long bones, hands, feet, chest, and abdomen.



 Figure EC 2.A 
Bite mark outlining the dental arch. (Modified from Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk, AJ.
Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018.)39

 Figure EC 2.B 
Cigarette burn appearing as a circular punched out lesion. (Modified from Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk, AJ. Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018.)39

48.e2	Part I Pediatric Acute Care

 Figure EC 2.C 
Loop marks from a cord or cable. (Modified from Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk, AJ.
Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018.)39



 Figure EC 2.D 
Multiple parallel lines equally distributed due to a slap from a hand. (Modified from Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk, AJ. Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 7th ed. Phila- delphia: Elsevier; 2018.)39

Chapter 2 Traumatic Injuries	49

(2) In children greater than 5 years of age, targeted imaging to the area(s) of suspected injury is usually appropriate. The utility of screening with skeletal survey diminishes after 5 years of age.
(3) In children 2 to 5 years of age, decisions about type of imaging are open to clinical judgement.
(4) Do not use "babygrams" (i.e., whole-body x-rays in one image) because of the high rate of false-negatives.
(5) Follow-up skeletal survey approximately 2 weeks after the initial examination should be performed when abnormal or equivocal findings are found on initial study and when abuse is suspected on clinical grounds to identify fractures missed on initial survey.
(6) Fractures with an association with child abuse include rib fractures, metaphyseal bucket and corner fractures, spine and scapula fractures, and complex skull fractures (Fig. 2.11 and Figs. EC 2.E-G for examples).
b. Head CT without contrast if:
(1) Less than 6 months of age with suspected abuse
(2) Neurologic changes
(3) Facial injuries concerning for abuse
c. Additional imaging/consultation
(1) Ophthalmologic evaluation for retinal hemorrhages.
(2) MRI may identify lesions not detected by CT (e.g., posterior fossa injury and diffuse axonal injury).
4. What to do if physical abuse is suspected
a. All healthcare providers are required by law to report suspected child maltreatment to the local police and/or child welfare agency.
b. In addition, consider consultation with local child injury/abuse specialist.
c. Medical stabilization is the primary goal; prevention of further injuries is the long-term goal.
d. The professional who makes such reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability.
e. Carefully and legibly document the following:
(1) Reported and suspected history and mechanisms of injury.
(2) Any history given by the victim in his or her own words (use quotation marks).
(3) Information provided by other providers or services.
(4) Physical examination findings, including drawings of injuries and details of dimensions, color, shape, and texture. Consider early use of police crime laboratory photography to document injuries. If tak- ing photos, start with full patient, then part of patient, then zoomed into wound, and then take a separate photo of wrist identification band.



 Figure EC 2.E 
Healing right clavicular fracture and nine fractures of the right ribs and four fractures of the left ribs. (Modified from Coley BD. Caffey's Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019.)40



 Figure EC 2.F 
Right acromial fracture (arrow). (Modified from Coley BD. Caffey's Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019.)40



 Figure EC 2.G 
Bilateral parietal fractures of the skull. (Modified from Coley BD. Caffey's Pediatric Diag- nostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019.)40


 
 FIGURE 2.11 
"Bucket-Handle Fracture" (A) and a "Corner Fracture" of the distal tibial metaphysis
(B). (Modified from Coley BD. Caffey's Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging. 13th ed. Philadel- phia: Elsevier; 2019.)40

B. Sexual Abuse
1. Physical Exam Findings
a. Normal genital examination does not rule out abuse; most examina- tions are normal in cases of abuse.36
b. Table 2.6 for physical exam findings highly suggestive of sexual abuse.37
2. What to do if sexual abuse is suspected38
a. If suspected sexual abuse occurred within 72 hours to a child younger than 12 years or within 120 hours to a child older than 12 years, defer interview and examination and urgently involve a multi- disciplinary team with a sexual assault nurse examiner with expertise in the evaluation of sexual abuse.
b. Nonacute examinations falling outside of the above time windows should be deferred to a child advocacy center.
c. Genital examination should be performed by a trained forensic specialist.
d. Evaluate the need for sexually transmitted infection (STI) testing.
3. STI testing
a. Tests include: Serum human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), serum syphilis, gonorrhea (culture or NAAT from pharynx and anus in boys and girls, vagina in girls and urethra in boys), chlamydia (culture or NAAT from anus in boys and girls, vagina in girls).
b. In adolescents, recommended for all patients.
c. In prepubertal children, consider testing if:
(1) Experienced penetration of the vagina or anus
(2) Abuse by a stranger










RESIDUAL (HEALING) INJURIES TO GENITAL/ANAL TISSUES
Perianal scar
Scar of the posterior fourchette or fossa
Healed hymenal transection/complete hymen cleft-a defect in the hymen below the 3-9 o'clock location that extends to or through the base of the hymen with no hymenal tissue discernible at that location
Signs of female genital mutilation or cutting, such as loss of part or all of the prepuce (clitoral head), labia minora or majora, or vertical linear scar adjacent to the clitoris


(3) Abuse by a perpetrator known to be infected with an STI or at high risk of being infected (e.g., IV drug use, men who have sex with men, people with multiple sexual encounters)
(4) Child with sibling or other relative in the household with STI
(5) Child living in an area with high rate of STI in the community
(6) Signs/symptoms of an STI
(7) Already been diagnosed with one STI

A. Acute Concussion Evaluation Forms for Emergency Department and Physician/Clinician Office: https://www.cdc.gov/headsup/providers/to ols.html
B. Acute Concussion Evaluation Care Plans for Work and School: https:// www.cdc.gov/headsup/providers/discharge-materials.html

A complete list of references can be found online at www.expertconsult.com.

 REFERENCES	
1. Kuppermann N, Holmes JF, Dayan PS, et al. Identification of children at very low risk of clinically-important brain injuries after head trauma: a prospective cohort study. Lancet. 2009;374(9696):1160-1170. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140- 6736(09)61558-0.
2. Leonard JC, Kuppermann N, Olsen C, et al. Factors associated with cervical spine injury in children after blunt trauma. Ann Emerg Med. 2011;58(2):145-155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annemergmed.2010.08.038.
3. Viccellio P, Simon H, Pressman BD, et al. A prospective multicenter study of cervical spine injury in children. Pediatrics. 2001;108(2):E20. http://www.ncbi.nl m.nih.gov/pubmed/11483830. Accessed October 1, 2018.
4. Hoffman JR, Mower WR, Wolfson AB, Todd KH, Zucker MI. Validity of a set of clinical criteria to rule out injury to the cervical spine in patients with blunt trauma. N Engl J Med. 2000;343(2):94-99. https://doi.org/10.1056/ NEJM200007133430203.
5. Hoffman JR, Wolfson AB, Todd K, Mower WR. Selective cervical spine radiog- raphy in blunt trauma: methodology of the National Emergency X-Radiography Utilization Study (NEXUS). Ann Emerg Med. 1998;32(4):461-469. http://www.nc bi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9774931. Accessed October 1, 2018.
6. Pediatric cervical spine clearance: a consensus statement and algorithm from the pediatric cervical spine clearance working group. J Bone Jt Surg.
7. Nigrovic LE, Rogers AJ, Adelgais KM, et al. Utility of plain radiographs in detecting traumatic injuries of the cervical spine in children. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2012;28(5):426-432. https://doi.org/10.1097/PEC.0b013e3182531911.
8. Bennett TD, Bratton SL, Riva-Cambrin J, et al. Cervical spine imaging in hospi- talized children with traumatic brain injury. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2015;31(4):243-
249. https://doi.org/10.1097/PEC.0000000000000395.
9. Flynn JM, Closkey RF, Mahboubi S, Dormans JP. Role of magnetic resonance imaging in the assessment of pediatric cervical spine injuries. J Pediatr Orthop. 22(5):573-577. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12198456. Accessed
September 30, 2018.
10. Henry M, Riesenburger RI, Kryzanski J, Jea A, Hwang SW. A retrospective com- parison of CT and MRI in detecting pediatric cervical spine injury. Childs Nerv Syst. 2013;29(8):1333-1338. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00381-013-2092-x.
11. Dare AO, Dias MS, Li V. Magnetic resonance imaging correlation in pediatric spinal cord injury without radiographic abnormality. J Neurosurg. 2002;97(suppl 1):33-39. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12120649. Accessed September 30, 2018.
12. Mahajan P, Jaffe DM, Olsen CS, et al. Spinal cord injury without radio- logic abnormality in children imaged with magnetic resonance imaging. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2013;75(5):843-847. https://doi.org/10.1097/ TA.0b013e3182a74abd.
13. Gioia GA, Collins M, Isquith PK. Improving identification and diagnosis of mild traumatic brain injury with evidence: psychometric support for the acute concussion evaluation. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2008;23(4):230-242. https://doi. org/10.1097/01.HTR.0000327255.38881.ca.
14. Zuckerbraun NS, Atabaki S, Collins MW, Thomas D, Gioia GA. Use of modified acute concussion evaluation tools in the emergency department. Pediatrics. 2014;133(4):635-642. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2013-2600.

51.e2	Part I Pediatric Acute Care

15. HEADS UP to Health Care Providers: Tools for Providers | HEADS UP | CDC Injury Center. https://www.cdc.gov/headsup/providers/tools.html. Published 2016. Accessed September 30, 2018.
16. Thomas DG, Apps JN, Hoffmann RG, McCrea M, Hammeke T. Benefits of strict rest after acute concussion: a randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2015;135(2):213-223. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2014-0966.
17. Sufrinko AM, Kontos AP, Apps JN, et al. The effectiveness of prescribed rest depends on initial presentation after concussion. J Pediatr. 2017;185:167-172. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.02.072.
18. Fleisher Gary R, Ludwig S, eds. Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Medicine. 6th ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
19. Drucker NA, McDuffie L, Groh E, Hackworth J, Bell TM, Markel TA. Physical examination is the best predictor of the need for abdominal surgery in children following motor vehicle collision. J Emerg Med. 2018;54(1):1-7. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.jemermed.2017.08.008.
20. Sudakoff Gary S, Rosen Max P, Rybicki Frank J, et al. Blunt Abdominal Trauma. https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/69409/Narrative/. Accessed February 28, 2019.
21. Shanmuganathan K, Mirvis SE, Chiu WC, Killeen KL, Hogan GJF, Scalea TM. Penetrating torso trauma: triple-contrast helical CT in peritoneal violation and organ injury-a prospective study in 200 patients. Radiology. 2004;231(3):775- 784. https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2313030126.
22. Scaife ER, Rollins MD, Barnhart DC, et al. The role of focused abdominal sonography for trauma (FAST) in pediatric trauma evaluation. J Pediatr Surg. 2013;48(6):1377-1383. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2013.03.038.
23. Andersson L, Andreasen JO, Day P, et al. Guidelines for the management of traumatic dental injuries: 2. avulsion of permanent teeth. Dent Traumatol. 2012;28(2):88-96. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-9657.2012.01125.x.
24. Dental Trauma Guide. https://dentaltraumaguide.org/dtg-members-frontpage/. Published 2018. Accessed January 10, 2018.
25. Diangelis AJ, Andreasen JO, Ebeleseder KA, et al. Guidelines for the manage- ment of traumatic dental injuries: 1. fractures and luxations of permanent teeth. Dent Traumatol. 2012;28:2-12. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-- 9657.2011.01103.x.
26. Gerstenblith, Adam T, Rabinowitz MP, eds. The Wills Eye Manual. 6th ed. Lip- pincott Williams & Wilkins; 2012.
27. Henretig FM, King C, eds. Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Procedures. 2nd ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2008.
28. Jijelava K, Le H, Parker J, Yee J. Getting Hooked: a simple technique for the treat- ment of adhesive injuries to the eyelids. J Emerg Med. 2017;52(1):74-76. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jemermed.2016.09.013.
29. Kimberlin DW, Long SS, Brady MT, Jackson MA, eds. Red Book: 2012 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases. American Academy of Pediatrics; 2012.
30. Samuels M, Wieteska S, eds. Advanced Paediatric Life Support. 5th ed. West Sus- sex, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2011. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118369784.
31. Smith ML. Pediatric burns: management of thermal, electrical, and chemical burns and burn-like dermatologic conditions. Pediatr Ann. 2000;29(6):367-378. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10868433. Accessed October 1, 2018.
32. Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk AJ. Zitelli and Davis' Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis: Expert Consult - Online. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2012. https
://books.google.es/books?id=rcZyYnav8BsC. Accessed February 28, 2019.

Chapter 2 Traumatic Injuries	51.e3

33. Wootton-Gorges SS, Soares BP, Alazraki AL, Anupindi SA, Blount JP, Booth TN, et al. Suspected Physical Abuse - Child; 2016.
34. Rubin DM, Christian CW, Bilaniuk LT, Zazyczny KA, Durbin DR. Diagnos- tic imaging of child abuse. Pediatrics. 2009;123(5):1382-1386. https://doi. org/10.1542/peds.111.6.1382.
35. Berkowitz CD. Physical Abuse of Children. Solomon CG, ed. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(17):1659-1666. https://doi:10.1056/NEJMcp1701446
36. Hariton TN. Sexual assault in prepubertal girls: 'It is normal to be normal' - or is it? Evidence of vaginal penetration in prepubertal girls. Med Sci Law. 2012;52(4):193-197. https://doi.org/10.1258/msl.2012.012015.
37. Adams JA, Farst KJ, Kellogg ND. Interpretation of medical findings in suspected child sexual abuse: an update for 2018. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2018;31(3):225-231. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpag.2017.12.011.
38. Kellogg N, American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Child Abuse and Neglect. The evaluation of sexual abuse in children. Pediatrics. 2005;116(2):506-
512. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2005-1336.
39. Zitelli, Basil J; McIntire, Sara C; Nowalk AJ. Zitelli and Davis' Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 7th ed. Elsevier; 2018. https://www.clinicalkey.com/#!/browse
/book/3-s2.0-C20140035599. Accessed March 1, 2019.
40. Coley BD, ed. Caffey's Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging-ClinicalKey. 13th ed. Cin- cinnati, Ohio: Elsevier; 2019. https://www.clinicalkey.com/#!/browse/book/3- s2.0-C20161008702. Accessed March 1, 2019.
41. Halstead ME, McAvoy K, Devore CD, et al. Returning to learning following a concussion. Pediatrics. 2013;132(5):948-957. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2013- 2867.


 FIGURE 2.7 
Frenulum tear due to direct blow to the face. (Modified from Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk, AJ. Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018.)39

 FIGURE 2.8 
Postauricular bruising. (Modified from Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk, AJ. Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018.)39


 FIGURE 2.9 
Petechial lesions due to choking. (Modified from Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk, AJ.
Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018.)39


 FIGURE 2.10 
Pinch marks signified by two small bruises separated by clear space. (Modified from Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk, AJ. Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018.)39








 See additional content on Expert Consult

Chapter 3
Toxicology
Maria D. Latham, MD


Whenever ingestion is suspected, contact local poison control at 1-800-222-1222.
Each year the American Association of Poison Control Centers records more than 1.2 million childhood poisoning exposures. Of these exposures, 76% occur in children younger than the age of 6 years. Exposures in young children are often unintentional, whereas adolescents are more likely to have intentional ingestions.1

 I. INITIAL EVALUATION	
A. History
1. Exposure history
Obtain history from witnesses and/or close contacts. Route, timing, and number of exposures (acute, chronic, or repeated ingestion), prior treat- ments or decontamination efforts.2,3
2. Substance identification and quantity ingested
Attempt to identify exact name of substance(s) ingested, including: product name, active ingredients, possible contaminants, expiration date, concentra- tion, and dose. Attempt to estimate the missing volume of liquid or the number of missing pills from a container. Poison control can assist with pill identification.
3. Environmental information
Accessible items in the house or garage; open containers; spilled tablets; household members taking medications, visitors to the house, herbs, or other complementary medicines.2
B. Workup and Laboratory Investigation
1. Electrocardiogram (ECG): Several medications will cause ECG changes, including QRS prolongation.
2. Blood Tests
a. Individual drug levels such as acetaminophen, aspirin, and ethanol are helpful general screenings in an acute, unknown ingestion.
b. Acetaminophen levels are especially important to test in suicidal ingestions. Acetaminophen is detected in 1/500 of all suicidal ingestions even when it is not reported as an ingested agent.3
c. Venous blood gas, blood glucose, and serum electrolytes.
3. Urine Toxicology Screens
a. Basic screens include amphetamines, cocaine, opiates, phencycli- dine (PCP), and tetrahydrocannabinol (THC).
52

Chapter 3 Toxicology	53

b. Positive results are presumptive only; must be confirmed by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry.4
C. Clinical Diagnostic Aids (Table EC 3.A)

 II. TOXIDROMES	
See Table 3.1.

 III. INGESTIONS AND ANTIDOTES	
See Table 3.2.
A. Decontamination
1. Activated charcoal5
a. Most effective when used within first hour after ingestion but can be given after first hour, especially for sustained-release preparations. Should be given PO to an awake and alert patient. Nasogastric (NG) tube should be used only if a patient is intubated.
b. Substances not absorbed by charcoal: Iron, alcohols, lithium
c. Contraindications: Unprotected airway, caustic ingestion, disrupted gastrointestinal tract, concern for aspiration
2. Whole bowel irrigation
a. Indicated for evacuation of substances not bound to activated charcoal such as iron, lead-containing foreign bodies, fatal sustained release products, drug packing.
b. Use a polyethylene glycol electrolyte solution preparation to irri- gate the bowel. Recommended rates: 9 months to 6 years (500 mL/hr), 6 to 12 years (1000 mL/hr), more than 12 years (1500 to
2000 mL/hr).
B. Enhanced Removal
1. Hemodialysis or exchange transfusions may be indicated to remove a drug/toxin.
2. Ingestions that may require enhanced removal therapies: Salicylate, lithium, methanol, ethylene glycol, metformin-associated lactic acidosis, valproate, theophylline
C. Other Considerations
1. Many ingestions managed primarily with supportive care of any associ- ated toxic effects, such as hypotension or hyperpyrexia.
2. Seizures: First line agents are benzodiazepines. Barbiturates or propofol should be considered as second line agents. Phenytoin has no role in the treatment of toxin-induced seizures.6
3. Patients with severe poisoning and refractory cardiorespiratory failure after ingestion are potential extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) candidates because the toxic effects are transient.




CLINICAL DIAGNOSTIC AIDS
Clinical Sign	Intoxicant







Bradypnea	Acetone, alcohol, barbiturates, botulinum toxin, clonidine, ethanol,
ibuprofen, opioids, nicotine, sedative-hypnotics

Bradycardia	a-Agonists, alcohols, ß-blockers, calcium channel blockers, central
a2-agonist, clonidine, cyanide, digoxin, opioids, organophosphates, plants (lily of the valley, foxglove, oleander), sedative-hypnotics
Hypotension	a-Agonists, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors,
barbiturates, carbon monoxide, cyanide, iron, methemoglobinemia, opioids, phenothiazine, sedative-hypnotics, TCAs
Profound hypotension: ß-blockers, calcium channel blockers, clonidine, cyclic antidepressants, digoxin, imidazolines, nitrites, quinidine, propoxyphene, theophylline
Hypoxia	Oxidizing agents


Nervous system instability

Insidious onset: Acetaminophen, benzocaine, opioids
Abrupt onset: Lidocaine, monocyclic or tricyclic antidepressants, phenothiazines, theophylline
Delayed onset: Atropine, diphenoxylate
Transient instability: Hydrocarbons



Ataxia	Alcohol, anticonvulsants, barbiturates, carbon monoxide, heavy metals,
hydrocarbons, solvents, sedative-hypnotics
Continued

53.e2	Part I Pediatric Acute Care


CLINICAL DIAGNOSTIC AIDS
Clinical Sign	Intoxicant

Coma	Alcohol, anesthetics, anticholinergics (antihistamines, antidepressants,
phenothiazines, atropinics, over-the-counter sleep preparations), anticonvulsants, baclofen, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, bromide, carbon monoxide, chloral hydrate, clonidine, cyanide, cyclic antidepressants, ?-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), hydrocarbons,
hypoglycemics, inhalants, insulin, lithium, opioids, organophosphate insecticides, phenothiazines, salicylates, sedative-hypnotics, tetrahydrozoline, theophylline
Miosis	Barbiturates, clonidine, ethanol, opioids, organophosphates, phencyclidine, phenothiazines, muscarinic mushrooms

Nystagmus	Barbiturates, carbamazepine, diphenylhydantoin, ethanol,
glutethimide, MAOIs, phencyclidine (both vertical and horizontal), sedative-hypnotics
Seizures	Ammonium fluoride, amphetamines, anticholinergics, antidepressants,
antihistamines, atropine, ß-blockers, boric acid, bupropion, caffeine, camphor, carbamates, carbamazepine, carbon monoxide, chlorinated insecticides, cocaine, cyclic antidepressants, diethyltoluamide, ergotamine, ethanol, GHB, Gyromitra mushrooms, hydrocarbons, hypoglycemics, ibuprofen, imidazolines, isoniazid, lead, lidocaine, lindane, lithium, LSD, meperidine, nicotine, opioids, organophosphate insecticides, phencyclidine, phenothiazines, phenylpropanolamine, phenytoin physostigmine, plants (water hemlock), propoxyphene, salicylates, strychnine, theophylline
Hypoperfusion	Calcium channel blockers, iron

ELECTROLYTES





CLINICAL DIAGNOSTIC AIDS
Clinical Sign	Intoxicant

Serum osmol gap	Acetone, ethanol, ethylene glycol, isopropyl alcohol, methanol, propylene
glycol


Cyanosis unresponsive to oxygen

Aniline dyes, benzocaine, nitrites, nitrobenzene, phenazopyridine, phenacetin



Jaundice	Acetaminophen, carbon tetrachloride, heavy metals (iron, phosphorus,
arsenic), naphthalene, phenothiazines, plants (mushrooms, fava beans)
Acetone	Acetone, isopropyl alcohol, phenol, salicylates

Bitter almond	Cyanide

Hydrocarbons	Hydrocarbons (gasoline, turpentine, etc.)

Pear	Chloral hydrate

RADIOLOGY



TABLE 3.1TOXIDROMESDrug ClassTempHRRRBPPupilsSkinMental StatusOther SignsCausative AgentsAnticholinergic???/nl?/nlDilatedDry, flushedDelirium,Urinary retention, decreasedAntihistamines, atropine,"Mad as a hatter, red as a beet, blind as a bat, hot as a hare,
dry as a bone"apsychosis, paranoiabowel sounds, thirst, garbled speechantipsychotics, phenothiazines, scopolamine, TCAsCholinergic
"SLUDGE, Killer B's"anl?? (bronchospasm)?/nlConstrictedSweatyDepressed, confusedSalivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, emesis.
Liquid nicotine can cause
fasciculations and paralysis.Organophosphates, pesticides, nerve agents, tobacco, liquid nicotineOpioids?/nl? /nl? (hypoventilation)?/nlConstrictedNo changeSedatedMorphine, fentanyl, oxycodone,
methadoneSympathomimetics?/nl??/nl?DilatedSweatyAgitatedAt risk for seizures, coronary
vasospasmAmphetamines, cocaineSedative/Hypnotics nl	nl	?/nl	?/nl	Normal	No change  Depressed	Benzodiazepines, barbiturates,
"Coma with normal	ethanol
vitals"Serotonergic	?	?	?	?/nl	Dilated	Flushed	Confusion	Shivering, muscle rigidity, at risk SSRIs, SNRIs, MAOIs, trazadone,

for seizures, hyperreflexia and clonus of lower extremities

dextromethorphan, LSD, TCAs, MDMA (ecstasy)


aThe "mad as a hatter" mnemonic references delirium, flushed skin, mydriasis, hyperpyrexia, and dry skin/urinary retention seen in the anticholinergic toxidrome. The "SLUDGE" mnemonic references salivation, lacrimation, urination, diaphoresis, gastrointestinal distress (including diarrhea), and emesis seen in the cholinergic toxidrome. The "Killer B's" mnemonic references bronchospasm, bronchorrhea, and bradycardia seen in the cholinergic toxidrome.
? refers to increased or elevated vital sign, ? refers to decreased or depressed vital sign, nl refers to vital sign within normal limits.
BP, Blood pressure; HR, heart rate; LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; MAOIs, monoamine oxidase inhibitors; RR, respiratory rate; SNRIs, serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors; SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; TCAs, tricyclic antidepressants; Temp, temperature.




COMMONLY INGESTED AGENTS
Ingested AgentSigns and SymptomsAntidoteaAcetaminophenSee Section IVAmphetaminesSee sympathomimetics
toxidrome in Table 3.1Supportive care
Benzodiazepines for agitationAnticholinergicsSee anticholinergic toxidrome
in Table 3.1Physostigmine3
Anticholinesterase (insecticides, donepezil, mushrooms)

See cholinergic toxidrome in Table 3.1

Atropine




Benzodiazepines	See sedative/hypnotic toxidrome in Table 3.1
ß-Blockers	Bradycardia, hypotension, AV conduction block, bronchospasm, hypoglycemia

Flumazenil

Glucagon
See insulin/dextrose treatment in calcium channel blockers

Calcium channel blockers

Bradycardia, hypotension, AV conduction block, pulmonary edema, hyperglycemia

Calcium chloride (10%)
Calcium gluconate (10%) Glucagon
High-Dose Insulin/Dextrose9: 1 unit/kg bolus ? infuse at 1-10 unit/kg/hr; give with D25W
at 0.5 g/kg/hr. Monitor BG frequently.



Cocaine	See sympathomimetics
toxidrome in Table 3.1

Supportive care



Ecstasy	Hallucinations, teeth grinding, hyperthermia, hyponatremia, seizures

Supportive care



Ethylene glycol/
methanol

Similar to ethanol; additionally,
blurry or double vision (methanol), renal failure/hypocalcemia (ethylene glycol), osmol gap with severe anion gap metabolic acidosis

Fomepizole
Ethanol (only to be used as second line agent when fomepizole unavailable; risk of inappropriate dosing, CNS depression, aspiration, and hypoglycemia).
Consider dialysis.




COMMONLY INGESTED AGENTS
Ingested AgentSigns and SymptomsAntidoteaIronVomiting, diarrhea, hypotension,
lethargy, anion gap metabolicDeferoxamineacidosis, cardiogenic shock,renal failureLeadSee Section VNicotineVomiting and cholinergicSupportive caretoxidrome in Table 3.1NSAIDsNausea, vomiting, epigastric pain,Supportive careheadache, gastrointestinalhemorrhage, renal failureOpioidsSee opioid toxidrome in Table 3.1NaloxoneOrganophosphatesSee cholinergic toxidrome in
Table 3.1Atropine
PralidoximeSalicylatesGastrointestinal upset, tinnitus,
tachypnea, hyperpyrexia,Sodium bicarbonate
Consider dialysisdizziness, lethargy, dysarthria,seizure, coma, cerebral edemaSerotonergicSee serotonergic toxidrome inBenzodiazepines (first line)AgentsTable 3.1CyproheptadineSulfonylureasHypoglycemia, dizziness, agitation, confusion,
tachycardia, diaphoresisFood (if able)
Dextrose: 0.5-1 g/kg (2-4 mL/kg of D25W)After euglycemia achieved: Octreotide: 1-1.25 mCg/kg SQ Q6-12 hr (max dose 50 mCg) if
rebound hypoglycemia
Synthetic cannabinoids

Agitation, altered sensorium, tachycardia, hypertension, vomiting, mydriasis, hypokalemia

Supportive care

TCAs	Tachycardia, seizures, delirium, widened QRS possibly leading to ventricular arrhythmias, hypotension

For wide QRS complex:
Sodium bicarbonate: 1-2 mEq/ kg IV push, followed by D5W
+ 140 mEq/L NaHCO3 and 20 meq/L KCl at 1.5× maintenance fluid rate with goal serum pH 7.45-7.55

Warfarin	Bleeding	Phytonadione/Vitamin K1
aSee Formulary for dosing recommendations.
BG, Blood glucose; CNS, central nervous system; KCl, potassium chloride; NaHCO3, sodium bicarbonate; NSAIDs, nonste- roidal antiinflammatory drugs; TCA, tricyclic antidepressant.
Data from Gummin DD, Mowry JB, Spyker DA, et al. 2017 Annual Report of the American Association of Poison Control Centers' National Poison Data System (NPDS): 35th Annual Report. Clin Toxicol. 2017;56(12):1213-1415.


 IV. ACETAMINOPHEN OVERDOSE7	
NAPQI metabolite is hepatotoxic.
A. Four Phases of Intoxication
1. Phase 1 (first 24 hours): Nonspecific symptoms such as nausea, mal- aise, vomiting.
2. Phase 2 (24 to 72 hours): Above symptoms resolve; right upper quad- rant pain, hepatomegaly, and increasing transaminases develop.
3. Phase 3 (72 to 96 hours): Return of nonspecific symptoms as well as evidence of liver failure (increased prothrombin time, lactate, phos- phate), renal failure, and encephalopathy.
4. Phase 4 (4 days to 2 weeks): Recovery or death.
B. Treatment Criteria
1. Serum acetaminophen concentration above the possible toxicity line on the Rumack-Matthew nomogram after single acute ingestion (Fig. 3.1).
2. History of ingesting more than 200 mg/kg or 10 g (whichever is less) and serum concentration not available or time of ingestion not known.
3. If time of ingestion is unknown or multiple/chronic ingestion, check acetaminophen level and AST. Treat if either is elevated.
C. Antidote: N-Acetylcysteine (See Formulary)
1. PO: 140 mg/kg loading dose followed by 70 mg/kg Q4 hours for 17 doses (18 total doses including loading dose).
2. Intravenous (IV): 150 mg/kg N-acetylcysteine IV loading dose over 60 minutes, followed by 50 mg/kg over 4 hours, followed by 100 mg/kg over 16 hours for a total infusion time of 21 hours. Some patients may require more than 21 hours of N-acetylcysteine administration.
3. Liver failure: Continue the 100 mg/kg over 16 hours infusion until resolution of encephalopathy, AST less than 1000 units/L, and INR less than 2.

 V. LEAD POISONING8	
A. Definition:
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) defines a reference level of 5 mCg/dL to identify children with elevated blood lead levels (BLLs).
B. Sources of Exposure:
Paint, dust, soil, drinking water, cosmetics, cookware, toys, and caregiv- ers with occupations and/or hobbies using lead-containing materials or substances.
C. Overview of Symptoms by Blood Lead Level:
1. BLL =40 mCg/dL: Irritability, vomiting, abdominal pain, constipation, anorexia
2. BLL =70 mCg/dL: Lethargy, seizure, and coma. Note: Children may be asymptomatic with lead levels greater than 100 mCg/dL.




























 FIGURE. 3.1 
Rumack-Matthew nomogram. Semilogarithmic plot of plasma acetaminophen levels versus time. This nomogram is valid for use after single acute ingestions of acetamino- phen. The need for treatment cannot be extrapolated based on a level before 4 hr. (Data from Pediatrics 55:871, 1975 and Micromedex.)

D. Management
1. See Tables 3.3 and 3.4 for general management and repeat testing guidelines.
2. Chelation therapy2
a. Asymptomatic children with BLL 45 to 69 mCg/dL
Succimer: 1050 mg/m2/day PO divided Q8 hours × 5 days, then 700 mg/m2/day divided Q12 hours × 14 days. See Formulary for more details.




MANAGEMENT OF LEAD POISONING8
Recommended Guidelines
Blood Lead Levels (BLL)	See Table 3.4 for Repeat Testing Guidelines.
5-9 mCg/dL1.

2.Obtain detailed environmental exposure history to assess for possible sources.
Provide education about reducing environmental lead exposure3and reducing dietary lead absorptiona10-19 mCg/dL1.As above for BLL 5-9 mCg/dL2.Consider iron studies.3.Environmental investigation may be available based on localresources.20-44 mCg/dL1.As above for BLL 5-9 mCg/dL2.Environmental investigation3.Iron level, complete blood cell count (CBC), abdominal radiog-raphy with bowel decontamination if indicated4.Complete exam including neurodevelopmental assessment45-69 mCg/dL1.As above for BLL 20-44 mCg/dL2.Administer oral chelation therapy, consider hospitalization=70 mCg/dL1.Hospitalize and commence chelation therapy2.Contact local poison controlaIron, calcium, and vitamin C help to minimize absorption of lead.


REPEAT BLOOD LEAD TESTING GUIDELINES8

If Screening BLL is: (mCg/dL)Time Frame of Confirmation of Screening BLLFollow-Up Testing (After Confirmatory Testing)Later Follow-Up Testing After BLL Declining=5-91-3 months3 months6-9 months10-191 week-1 montha1-3 months3-6 months20-241 week-1 montha1-3 months1-3 months25-441 week-1 montha2 weeks-1 month1 month45-5948 hrRepeat testing as soon as possible after chelation therapy60-6924 hr=70UrgentlyaPer provider discretion.
BLL, Blood lead level.

b. Asymptomatic children with BLL =70 mCg/dL
(1) Succimer: Per above dosing.
(2) Edetate (EDTA) calcium disodium: 1000 mg/m2 (max dose 2 to 3 g) as 24-hour IV infusion × 5 days. Begin two hours after first dose of succimer. Monitor renal function closely.
Warning: Do not mistake edetate disodium for edetate calcium diso- dium. Edetate calcium disodium is the correct medicine used for the treatment of lead poisoning.


c. Symptomatic children (e.g., lead encephalopathy, seizure)
(1) Dimercaprol (BAL): 450 mg/m2/day IM divided Q4 hours × 3 to 5 days (number of days based on clinical course). Do not give to patients with peanut allergy. Do not use concomitantly with
iron, as BAL-iron complex is a potent emetic. Use with caution in patients with G6PD deficiency, as it may cause hemolysis.
(2) Edetate (EDTA) calcium disodium: 1500 mg/m2 (maximum dose 2 to 3 g) as 24-hour IV continuous infusion × 5 days. Begin four hours after first dose of BAL.

 VI. WEB RESOURCES	
• American Association of Poison Control Centers: http://www.aapcc.org/
• American Academy of Clinical Toxicology: http://www.clintox.org/index.cfm
• Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Section on Environmental
Health: http://www.cdc.gov/nceh

 REFERENCES	
A complete list of references can be found online at www.expertconsult.com.

 REFERENCES	
1. Gummin DD, Mowry JB, et al. 2017 Annual Report of the American Association of Poison Control Centers' National Poison Data System (NPDS): 35th Annual Report. Clin Toxicol. 2017;56(12):1213-1415.
2. Nelson LS, Hoffman RS, et al. Goldfrank's Toxicologic Emergencies. 11th ed. NewYork: McGraw-Hill; 2019.
3. Dart RC, Rumack BH. Poisoning. In: Hay WW, Levin MJ, Sondheimer JM, et al., eds. Current Pediatric Diagnosis and Treatment. 19th ed. New York: McGraw- Hill; 2009:313-338.
4. Moeller KE, Lee KC, Kissack JC. Urine drug screening: practical guide for clini- cians. Mayo Clinic Proc. 2008;83(1):66-76.
5. Fleisher GR, Ludwig S, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Medicine. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2016.
6. Chen HY, Albertson TE, Olson KR. Treatment of drug-induced seizures. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2015;81(3):412-419.
7. Kostic, MA. Poisoning. In: Kleigman RM, Stanton BF, St Geme JW, et al. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 63: 447-467.
8. Advisory Committee on Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Low level lead exposure harms children: a
renewed call for primary prevention. Published January 2012 http://www.cdc.gov/ nceh/lead/ACCLPP/Final_Document_030712.pdf.
9. Engebretsen KM, Kaczmarek KM, Morgan J, Holger JS. High-dose insulin therapy in beta-blocker and calcium channel-blocker poisoning. Clin Toxicol. 2011;49(4):277-283.

Chapter 4
Procedures
Andrew Percy, MD

 See additional content on Expert Consult

 I. GENERAL GUIDELINES	
A. Consent
Before performing any procedure, it is crucial to obtain informed consent from the parent or guardian by explaining the procedure, the indications, any risks involved, and any alternatives. Obtaining consent should not impede life-saving, emergency procedures.
B. Risks
1. All invasive procedures involve pain, risk for infection and bleeding, and potential injury to neighboring structures.
2. Sedation and analgesia should be planned in advance, and the risks of such explained to the parent and/or patient as appropriate. (See Chapter 6 and the AAP Guidelines for Monitoring and Management of
Pediatric Patients Before, During, and After Sedation for Diagnostic and Therapeutic Procedures.1)
3. Universal precautions and proper sterile technique should be followed for all patient contact that exposes the healthcare provider to bodily fluids.
C. Documentation
It is important that the physician performing the procedure document the informed consent process. Include the date, time, additional personnel present (if applicable), brief summary of the consent conversation, the diagnosis, recommended procedure, specific risks and benefits, and alter- native treatments. It is equally important to document if a patient refuses a procedure and that the risks associated with refusal were discussed.
D. Attending to the Needs of a Fearful Child
Children represent a vulnerable population in that they often lack the capacity to understand why a potentially uncomfortable procedure is being performed. All efforts should be made to provide information about the pro- cedure to the child at an age-appropriate level. Utilize Child Life Specialists as able. When possible, allow the child to touch unfamiliar objects in the examination room to desensitize them and enhance trust. Address the child's fears. Toddlers often fear separation from the parent. Older children often fear pain. Adolescents often worry about embarrassment sustained by expressing anxiety or fear. Encourage active parent participation and presence. Allow all children a degree of basic autonomy such as selecting
the postprocedure bandage color.


 II. ULTRASOUND FOR PROCEDURES	
A. Introduction to Ultrasound
Ultrasound has become an increasingly important bedside diagnostic and procedural aid, and it can improve visualization of subcutaneous structures during procedures.
B. Ultrasound Basics
1. Probe Selection
a. Linear transducers use higher frequencies to produce higher resolu- tion images and are primarily used for procedures in pediatrics. A wide area of contact at the skin surface facilitates needle placement in procedures.
b. Curvilinear transducers use low to midrange frequencies and permit deep structure visualization. Though they provide a wide area of skin contact to facilitate procedures near concave and convex surfaces, larger curvilinear probes are difficult to use in small children.
c. There are a variety of other probes (phased-array, microconvex) that generate sector shaped images but are predominantly used for diagnostic purposes.
2. Image Optimization
a. Ensure adequate contact by using enough ultrasound gel and apply- ing comfortable pressure on the skin.
b. Gain: Measure of image brightness which is used for optimizing images and reducing artifact.
c. Frequency: Increase to improve image resolution of shallow struc- tures. Decrease to improve imaging of deep structures.
d. Depth: Adjust to visualize structure of interest and at least a centime- ter of tissue below that structure.

 III. NEUROLOGIC PROCEDURES: LUMBAR PUNCTURE2,3	
A. Indications:
Examination of spinal fluid for suspected infection, inflammatory disorder, or malignancy, instillation of intrathecal chemotherapy, or measurement of opening pressure.
B. Complications:
Local pain, infection, bleeding, spinal fluid leak, hematoma, spinal head- ache, and acquired epidermal spinal cord tumor (caused by implantation of epidermal material into the spinal canal if no stylet is used on skin entry).
C. Cautions and Contraindications:
1. Increased intracranial pressure (ICP): Before lumbar puncture (LP), perform a funduscopic examination. Presence of papilledema, retinal hemorrhage, or clinical suspicion of increased ICP should prompt fur- ther evaluation and may be a contraindication to the procedure. A sud- den drop in spinal canal fluid pressure by rapid release of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) may cause fatal herniation. Computed tomography (CT)


may be indicated before LP if there is suspected intracranial bleeding, focal mass lesion, or increased ICP. A normal CT scan does not rule out increased ICP but usually excludes conditions that may put the patient at risk for herniation. Decision to obtain CT should not delay appropriate antibiotic therapy, if indicated.
2. Bleeding diathesis: Platelet count greater than 50,000/mm3 is desir- able before LP, and correction of any clotting factor deficiencies can minimize the risk for bleeding and subsequent cord or nerve root compression.
3. Overlying skin infection may result in inoculation of CSF with organisms.
4. LP should be deferred in unstable patients, and appropriate therapy should be initiated, including antibiotics, if indicated.
D. Procedure:
1. Apply local anesthetic cream if sufficient time is available.
2. Position child (Fig. 4.1) in either the sitting position or lateral recumbent position, with hips, knees, and neck flexed. Keep shoulders and hips aligned to avoid rotating the spine. Do not compromise a small infant's cardiorespiratory status with positioning.
3. Locate the desired intervertebral space (either L3 to L4 or L4 to L5) by drawing an imaginary line between the top of the iliac crests. Alternatively, ultrasound can be used to mark the intervertebral space (see Section XI, Online Content).
4. Prepare the skin in a sterile fashion. Drape conservatively to make moni- toring the infant possible. Use a 20- to 22-G spinal needle with stylet (1.5, 2.5, or 3.5 inch depending on the size of the child). A smaller- gauge needle will decrease the incidence of spinal headache and CSF leak.
5. Overlying skin and interspinous tissue can be anesthetized with 1% lidocaine using a 25G needle.
6. Puncture the skin in the midline just caudad to the palpated spinous process, angling slightly cephalad toward the umbilicus. Advance several millimeters at a time, and withdraw stylet frequently to check for CSF flow. Needle may be advanced without the stylet once it is com- pletely through the skin. In small infants, one may not feel a change in resistance or "pop" as the dura is penetrated.
7. If resistance is met initially and the needle cannot be advanced, with- draw needle to just under the skin surface and redirect the angle of the needle slightly.
8. Send CSF for appropriate studies. In general, send the first tube for culture and Gram stain, the second tube for measurement of glucose and protein levels, and the last tube for cell count and differential. Additional tubes can be collected for viral cultures, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), or CSF metabolic studies, if indicated. If subarachnoid hemorrhage or traumatic tap is suspected, send the first and fourth tubes for cell count, and ask the laboratory to examine the CSF for xanthochromia.




 FIGURE 4.1 
Lumbar puncture site. (A) Infant placed in sitting position. (B) Infant placed in lateral (recumbent) position. (From Dieckmann R, Fiser D, Selbst S. Pediatric Emergency and Critical Care Procedures. St. Louis: Mosby; 1997.)

9. Accurate measurement of CSF pressure can be made only with the patient lying quietly on his or her side in an unflexed position. It is not a reliable measurement in the sitting position. Once the free flow of spinal fluid is obtained, attach the manometer and measure CSF pressure. Opening pressure is recorded when the CSF level is steady.


E. A video on lumbar punctures is available on the New England Journal of Medicine's website.

 IV. OTOLARYNGOLOGIC PROCEDURES	
A. Cerumen Impaction Removal4,5
1. Indications: Symptomatic (decreased hearing, pain) and/or assess- ment of the ear. Clinicians should not routinely disimpact asymptomatic patients whose ears can be adequately assessed.
2. Complications: Allergic reaction to cerumenolytics, trauma, earache, diz- ziness, nystagmus, retention of water, tympanic membrane perforation.
3. Procedures:
a. Cerumenolytics
(1) There is no high-quality evidence suggesting that one cerumeno- lytic is more effective than another. Water and saline are equally as effective as cerumenolytics. There is no difference in efficacy between oil-based and water-based treatments.
(2) Avoid hydrogen peroxide; may exacerbate cerumen impaction.
(3) Apply 5 to 10 eardrops twice daily for no longer than 4 days. Keep the head tilted for several minutes for cerumenolytic retention.
b. Irrigation
(1) Direct visualization is not necessary.
(2) Irrigation of the ear canal with a large syringe containing luke- warm water is equally effective as a commercial mechanical jet irrigator.5
(3) Place a small bucket (e.g., emesis bin) under the patient's ear to collect water.
(4) Straighten the ear as much as possible by lifting the auricle up and posteriorly. Gently apply a continuous stream upwards in the canal.
(5) Note that irrigation is contraindicated in patients with tympanos- tomy tubes or perforated tympanic membranes, and for remov- ing vegetables/legumes (increases swelling) and button batteries (enhances current flow).
c. Manual Removal/Instrumentation
(1) Most useful for cerumen removal in the outer one-third of the ear.
(2) Direct visualization is essential, and may render manual removal impossible in an uncooperative patient.
(3) Tools include curettes (plastic or metal), spoons, alligator forceps. Do not attempt to break through the cerumen. Advance the loop of the curette behind the cerumen and retrieve.
d. A video on cerumen removal is available on the New England Journal of Medicine's website.
B. Foreign Body Removal from Ear6
1. Indications: Retained foreign body in the external auditory canal.


2. Contraindications: Urgent referral to an otolaryngologist prior to attempted removal is indicated if object is a button battery or penetrat- ing the ear canal (e.g., pencil, cotton-tipped swab).
3. Complications: External auditory canal trauma (most common), perfora- tion of the tympanic membrane, retained foreign object.
4. Procedure:
a. Insects should be killed with mineral oil, ethanol, or lidocaine prior to attempted removal.
b. Irrigation is useful for hard objects resistant to grasping that are nonocclusive.
c. Instrumentation is most successful for irregularly shaped objects that are graspable.
d. Refer to otolaryngology if removal is unsuccessful.
5. A video on removal of foreign bodies from the ear and nose is available on the New England Journal of Medicine's website.
C. Foreign Body Removal from Nose6,7
1. Indications: Retained foreign body in the nasal cavity. Button batteries and magnets attached to the nasal septum require urgent removal.
2. Contraindications: Most nasal foreign bodies do not require subspecialty referral. Consider otolaryngology referral for posterior objects, button batteries, and unsuccessful initial attempts.
3. Complications: Epistaxis, perforation of cribriform plate, retained foreign object.
4. Procedure: Lidocaine or any vasoconstrictor (e.g., crushed ice) may be used to minimize bleeding and edema.
a. Self-Removal: The easiest and least invasive method. Typically, only effective for patients older than 3 years. Instruct the patient to occlude the unobstructed nostril and blow his/her nose.
b. Parent Kiss: Provides up to a 60% successful removal rate.
(1) Instruct the caregiver to place his/her lips around the patient's lips (similar to a "mouth-to-mouth" resuscitation breath) and occlude the uninvolved nostril with one finger.
(2) Quickly and forcefully exhale one puff into the child's mouth. This maneuver often expels the foreign body.
c. High-Flow Oxygen: Best for foreign bodies that completely occlude the anterior nasal cavity. Place suction tubing into the unobstructed nostril while the child's mouth is closed. Deliver 10 to 15 L/min of oxygen flow through the tubing.
d. Instrumentation: Best for foreign bodies that are nonocclusive.
(1) Equipment: alligator forceps, right-angle hook, Foley catheter (5 to 8 Fr), irrigating devices
(2) Use alligator forceps to extract compressible objects that have rough surfaces.
(3) Use a right-angle hook for smooth objects that cannot be easily grasped.


(4) Use a Foley catheter for small round objects (e.g., marble). Lubricate the catheter, advance the uninflated catheter past the object, inflate the catheter balloon, and withdraw the catheter and the object.
D. Management of Epistaxis6,8
1. Indications: Simple nosebleed. Most cases of epistaxis in children have a benign etiology. Referral to an otolaryngologist is only indicated for uncontrollable bleeding, posterior epistaxis, hemodynamic instability, or anatomic abnormalities (e.g., tumors, polyps). See Chapter 14 for management of epistaxis in patients with hemophilia, von Willebrand disease, immune thrombocytopenia, or other bleeding disorders.
2. Complications: Persistent bleeding, swallowing blood, toxic shock syndrome (from packing material), septal hematomas/abscesses from traumatic packing.
3. Procedure: The child should sit upright and bent forward at the waist to minimize swallowing blood.
a. Direct compression: Instruct the child or parent to compress the nasal alae together for a minimum of 5 to 10 minutes. Most simple bleeds will clot after 5 to 10 minutes.
b. Topical vasoconstriction: Use oxymetazoline-soaked cotton pledgets or gauze. Phenylephrine is associated with morbidity when used topi- cally and should be avoided in patients younger than 6 years of age. However, if bleeding is refractory to other interventions, the minimum dose of phenylephrine needed to cease bleeding should be used. Use a squirt bottle or apply the vasoconstrictor on a piece of cotton, applying direct pressure on the nose for 5 to 10 minutes.
c. Nasal packing
(1) Apply topical anesthetic (4% lidocaine or tetracaine) on a cotton pledget and insert into the nasal cavity.
(2) Rub antibiotic ointment into a quarter-inch × 72-inch gauze ribbon. Using a nasal speculum or forceps, pack the nasal cavity by grasping the gauze ribbon approximately 6 inches from its end and placing the packing as far back as possible. Ensure that the free end protrudes from the nose and secure with tape.
(3) Maintain packing for 72 hours and prescribe antistaphylococ- cal antibiotic for 7 to 10 days to minimize risk of toxic shock syndrome. If bleeding persists after 72 hours, packing should be replaced and the child referred to an otolaryngologist.

 V. CARDIOVASCULAR PROCEDURES	
A. Vagal Maneuvers for Supraventricular Tachycardia (SVT)9,10,11
1. Indications: Supraventricular tachycardia, 2:1 atrioventricular (AV) block, evaluation of cardiac murmurs.


2. Contraindications: Carotid sinus massage is to be avoided in patients with prior stroke within the past 3 months or any history of ventricular arrhythmia.
3. Complications: Typically transient (resolve within seconds to minutes) and include prolonged sinus pause, hypertension (increased intratho- racic pressure), hypotension (decreased venous return/decrease in intrathoracic pressure on exhalation).
4. Procedure:
a. Cold stimulus to the face: Briefly place an icepack or washcloth soaked in ice water on the forehead or bridge of the nose. The ice should not be applied for longer than 30 seconds to avoid frostbite.
b. Valsalva maneuver: Place the patient in supine position and instruct to exhale forcefully against a closed glottis. The strain should be maintained for 10 to 15 seconds before resuming normal breathing.
c. Modified Valsalva maneuver: Greater success rate at restoring sinus rhythm than standard Valsalva. Place the patient in a semi-
recumbent position (45-degree angle), and apply standard Valsalva strain. Immediately reposition supine with 15 seconds of passive leg raise at a 45-degree angle.
d. Carotid sinus massage: Place the patient in a supine position with neck extension. Apply steady pressure for 5 to 10 seconds to one carotid sinus (inferior to the angle of the mandible where pulsation is detected). If unsuccessful, wait 1 to 2 minutes and repeat on the contralateral side.
B. Heelstick and Fingerstick12
1. Indications: Blood sampling in infants, obtaining point of care whole blood samples such as serum glucose
2. Complications: Infection, bleeding, osteomyelitis.
3. Procedure:
a. Warm heel or finger.
b. Clean with alcohol.
c. Using a lancet puncture heel on the lateral aspect, avoiding the posterior area, or finger on the distal palmar lateral pad.
d. Wipe away the first drop of blood, and then collect the sample using a capillary tube or container.
e. Alternate between squeezing blood from the leg toward the heel (or from the hand toward the finger) and then releasing the pressure for several seconds.
C. Peripheral Intravenous Access
1. Indications: Blood sampling and access to peripheral venous circulation to deliver fluid, medications, or blood products.
2. Complications: Thrombosis, infection.
3. Procedure:
a. Apply tourniquet around the extremity proximal to chosen site.
b. Prepare site with alcohol or chlorhexidine.


c. Insert IV catheter, bevel up, at an angle almost parallel to the skin, advancing until a flash of blood is seen in the catheter hub. Advance the plastic catheter only, remove the needle, and secure the catheter.
d. After removing tourniquet, attach a syringe and apply gentle negative pressure to withdraw blood for serum sampling. Then, attach T con- nector filled with saline to the catheter, flush with normal saline (NS) to ensure patency of the IV line.
4. Ultrasound-Guided Procedure:
a. With linear ultrasound probe, identify a vein that does not appear to be prohibitively tortuous or stenotic. Perform this by sliding the
probe along the course of the vessel and identifying its direction and branching. The saphenous veins in the calves, veins in the forearms, antecubital areas, inside of the upper arms, and external jugular veins are areas where ultrasound guidance can help. An ideal vessel appears less than 1 cm below the skin surface. Deeper vessels are prone to through-and-through perforation of the vessel. Infiltration around deeper vessels is also a risk, as a shorter length of catheter resides in the vessel after insertion.
b. Prepare the site, and in the case of limb vessels, place a tourniquet proximal to the insertion site.
c. Under ultrasound visualization, insert the needle into the skin at a shallow (usually <30 degrees) angle to the skin at the midline of the probe near where it contacts the skin. With the probe visualizing the vessel transversely, slowly advance the needle and follow the tip of the needle by sliding the probe away from you. Advance the ultra- sound probe until the needle punctures the vessel wall.
d. Proceed with cannulation of the vessel and secure the intravenous catheter per standard procedure.
5. Infiltration and Extravasation13: Common injury secondary to fluid infu- sion into subcutaneous tissues around the venipuncture site. Typically occurs due to puncture of the vein or if the catheter slips out of the vein. The difference between infiltration and extravasation is the type of fluid that has leaked (nonvesicant vs. vesicant). Infiltrations are generally benign, although they can still inflict damage via exertion of mechani- cal forces on surrounding structures. Extravasation due to a vesicant can cause blistering and burns, leading to necrosis of the tissue. To determine if infiltration/extravasation has occurred, firmly occlude the vein 1 to 2 inches proximal to the insertion site. Continued infusion with- out resistance indicates infiltration. Immediately stop the infusion. Refer to institutional policy for guidelines regarding application of medication (e.g., hyaluronidase, phentolamine, nitroglycerin ointment). Elevate the affected limb to reduce swelling; apply a warm compress for 10 to 15 minutes; encourage movement of the affected arm. Reevaluate the site every 8 hours.
6. A video on peripheral IV placement is available on the New England
Journal of Medicine's website.


7. A video on ultrasound-guided peripheral IV placement is available on the
New England Journal of Medicine's website.
D. External Jugular Puncture and Catheterization (see Section XI, Online Content)
E. Radial Artery Puncture and Catheterization2,3
1. Indications: Arterial blood sampling or frequent blood gas and continu- ous blood pressure monitoring in an intensive care setting.
2. Complications: Infection, bleeding, occlusion of artery by hematoma or thrombosis, ischemia if ulnar circulation is inadequate.
3. Procedure:
a. Before the procedure, test adequacy of ulnar blood flow with the Allen test: Clench the hand while simultaneously compressing ulnar and radial arteries. The hand will blanch. Release pressure from the ulnar artery, and observe the flushing response. Procedure is safe to perform if the entire hand flushes.
b. Locate the radial pulse. It is optional to infiltrate the area over the point of maximal impulse with lidocaine. Avoid infusion into the ves- sel by aspirating before infusing. Prepare the site in a sterile fashion.
c. Puncture: Insert a butterfly needle attached to a syringe at a 30- to 60-degree angle over the point of maximal impulse. Blood should flow freely into the syringe in a pulsatile fashion. Suction may be required for plastic tubes. Once the sample is obtained, apply firm, constant pressure for 5 minutes and then place a pressure dressing on the puncture site.
d. Catheter placement: Secure the patient's hand to an arm board. Leave the fingers exposed to observe any color changes. Prepare the wrist with sterile technique and infiltrate over the point of maximal impulse with 1% lidocaine. Insert an IV catheter with its needle at a 30-degree angle to the horizontal until a flash of blood is seen in the catheter hub. Advance the plastic catheter and remove the needle. Alternatively, pass the needle and catheter through the artery to trans- fix it, and then withdraw the needle. Very slowly, withdraw the catheter until free flow of blood is noted, then advance the catheter and secure in place using sutures or tape. Seldinger technique (Fig. 4.2) using a guidewire can also be used. Apply a sterile dressing and infuse hepa- rinized isotonic fluid (per institutional protocol) at a minimum of 1 mL/ hr. A pressure transducer may be attached to monitor blood pressure.
e. Suggested size of arterial catheters based on weight:
(1) Infant (<10 kg): 24 G or 2.5 Fr, 2.5 cm
(2) Child (10 to 40 kg): 22 G or 2.4 Fr, 2.5 cm
(3) Adolescent (>40 kg): 20 G
4. Ultrasound-Guided Procedure
a. Use the linear probe. After the sterile field has been prepped, apply gel to the probe and place within a sterile cover. Place the ultra- sound probe transverse to the artery on the radial, posterior tibial, or











A








B







C

 FIGURE 4.2 
Seldinger technique. (A) Guidewire is placed through introducer needle into lumen of vein. (B) Catheter is advanced into vein lumen along guidewire. (C) Hub of catheter is secured to skin with suture. (Modified from Fuhrman B, Zimmerman J. Pediatric Critical Care. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2011.)

dorsalis pedis pulse. Identify the artery, which will appear pulsatile with some compression. Once the artery has been identified, center the probe over the vessel (Fig. 4.3). Insert the needle into the skin at a 45-degree angle at the midline of the probe near where it contacts the skin. With the probe visualizing the vessel transversely, slowly


 
 FIGURE 4.3 
Ultrasound transverse view of radial artery. In the left image, the radial artery is seen in cross section with veins on either side. On the right image, pressure has been applied and the veins are collapsed while the artery remains patent. A, Artery; V, vein. (From Weiner MM, Geldard P, Mittnacht AJC. Ultrasound guided vascular access: a compre- hensive review. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2013;27(2):345-360.)

advance the needle and follow the tip of the needle by sliding the probe away. Advance the ultrasound probe until the needle punc- tures the vessel wall. Proceed with the rest of the procedure after vessel puncture, as described previously.
5. Videos on arterial puncture and radial artery catheterization are available on the New England Journal of Medicine's website.
6. A video on ultrasound-guided radial artery catheterization is available on the New England Journal of Medicine's website.
F. Posterior Tibial and Dorsalis Pedis Artery Puncture
1. Indications: Arterial blood sampling when radial artery puncture is unsuccessful or inaccessible.
2. Complications: Infection, bleeding, ischemia if circulation is inadequate.
3. Procedure:
a. Posterior tibial artery: Puncture the artery posterior to medial mal- leolus while holding the foot in dorsiflexion.
b. Dorsalis pedis artery: Puncture the artery at dorsal midfoot between first and second toes while holding the foot in plantar flexion.
G. Intraosseous (IO) Access2,3 (Fig. 4.4)
1. Indications: Obtain emergency access in children during life-threatening situations. This is very useful during cardiopulmonary arrest, shock, burns, and life-threatening status epilepticus. Any crystalloid, blood product, or drug that may be infused into a peripheral vein may also
be infused into the IO space. The IO needle should be removed once adequate vascular access has been established. Insertion of IO needle into fractured bones should be avoided.
2. Complications:
a. Complications are rare, particularly with the correct technique. Frequency of complications increases with prolonged infusions.



 FIGURE 4.4 
Intraosseous needle placement using standard anterior tibial approach. Insertion point is in the midline on medial flat surface of anterior tibia, 1 to 3 cm (2 fingerbreadths) below tibial tuberosity. (From Dieckmann R, Fiser D, Selbst S. Pediatric Emergency and Critical Care Procedures. St. Louis: Mosby; 1997.)

b. Complications include extravasation of fluid from incomplete or through and through cortex penetration, infection, bleeding, osteo- myelitis, compartment syndrome, fat embolism, fracture, epiphyseal injury.
3. Sites of entry (in order of preference):
a. Anteromedial surface of the proximal tibia, 2 cm below and 1 to 2 cm medial to the tibial tuberosity on the flat part of the bone.
b. Distal femur 3 cm above the lateral condyle in the midline.
c. Medial surface of the distal tibia 1 to 2 cm above the medial mal- leolus (may be a more effective site in older children).
d. Proximal humerus, 2 cm below the acromion process into the greater tubercle with the arm held in adduction and internal rotation.
e. Anterosuperior iliac spine at a 90-degree angle to the long axis of the body.
4. Procedure:
a. Prepare the selected site in a sterile fashion.
b. If the child is conscious, anesthetize the puncture site down to the periosteum with 1% lidocaine (optional in emergency situations).
c. Choose between a manual IO or drill-powered IO insertion device:
(1) For manual IO needle: Insert a 15- to 18-gauge IO needle per- pendicular to the skin at an angle away from the epiphyseal plate, and advance to the periosteum. With a boring rotary motion, pen- etrate through the cortex until there is a decrease in resistance, indicating that you have reached the marrow. The needle should stand firmly without support. Secure the needle carefully.
(2) For drill-powered IO needle: Enter skin with the needle perpen- dicular to the skin, as with the manual needle, and press the needle until you meet the periosteum. Then apply easy pressure


while gently depressing the drill trigger until you feel a decrease in resistance. Remove the drill while holding the needle steady to ensure stability prior to securing the needle. Use an EZ-IO AD for patients greater than 40 kg, and use EZ-IO PD for patients greater than 6 kg and less than 40 kg.
d. Remove the stylet and attempt to aspirate marrow. (Note that it is not necessary to aspirate marrow.) Flush with crystalloid solution.
Observe for fluid extravasation. Marrow can be sent to determine glu- cose levels, chemistries, blood types and cross-matches, hemoglobin levels, blood gas analyses, and cultures.
e. Attach standard IV tubing. Increased pressure (through pressure bag or push) may be necessary for infusion. There is a high risk for obstruction if continuous high-pressure fluids are not flushed through the IO needle.
5. A video on IO catheter placement is available on the New England Journal of Medicine's website.
H. Umbilical Artery and Umbilical Vein Catheterization2
1. Indications: Vascular access (via umbilical vein [UV]), blood pressure monitoring (via umbilical artery [UA]), or blood gas monitoring (via UA) in critically ill neonates.
2. Complications: Infection, bleeding, hemorrhage, perforation of vessel, thrombosis with distal embolization, ischemia or infarction of lower extrem- ities, bowel, or kidney, arrhythmia if catheter is in the heart, air embolus.
3. Contraindications: Omphalitis, peritonitis, possible/confirmed necrotizing enterocolitis, intestinal hypoperfusion.
4. Line placement:
a. Umbilical arterial catheter (UAC) line: Low line vs. high line.
(1) Low line: Tip of catheter should lie just above the aortic bifurca- tion between L3 and L5. This avoids renal and mesenteric arter- ies near L1, possibly decreasing the incidence of thrombosis or ischemia.
(2) High line: Tip of catheter should be above the diaphragm between T6 and T9. A high line may be recommended in infants weighing less than 750 g, in whom a low line could easily slip out.
b. Umbilical venous catheter (UVC) lines should be placed in the infe- rior vena cava above the level of the ductus venosus and the hepatic veins and below the level of the right atrium.
c. Catheter length: Determine the length of catheter required using either a standardized graph based on shoulder-umbilical length or the following birth weight (BW) regression formula:
(1) UAC Low Line (cm) = BW (kg) × 7
(2) UAC High Line (cm) = (3 × BW (kg)) + 9
(3) UVC Length (cm) = 0.5 × UAC high line (cm) + 1.
5. Procedure for UAC line (Fig. 4.5):

























 FIGURE 4.5 
Placement of umbilical arterial catheter. (A) Dilating lumen of umbilical artery. (B) Insertion of umbilical artery catheter. (From Dieckmann R, Fiser D, Selbst S. Pediatric Emergency and Critical Care Procedures. St. Louis: Mosby; 1997.)

a. Determine the length of the catheter to be inserted for either high (T6 to T9) or low (L3 to L5) position.
b. Restrain infant. Maintain the infant's temperature during the proce- dure. Prepare and drape the umbilical cord and adjacent skin using sterile technique.
c. Flush the catheter with sterile saline solution before insertion. Ensure that there are no air bubbles in the catheter or attached syringe.
d. Place sterile umbilical tape around the base of the cord. Cut through the cord horizontally about 1.5 to 2 cm from the skin; tighten the umbilical tape to prevent bleeding.
e. Identify the one large, thin-walled UV and two smaller, thick-walled arteries. Use one tip of open, curved forceps to gently probe and dilate one artery. Then use both points of closed forceps, and dilate artery by allowing forceps to open gently.


f. Grasp the catheter 1 cm from its tip with toothless forceps and insert the catheter into the lumen of the artery. Aim the tip toward the feet and gently advance the catheter to the desired distance. Do not force. If resistance is encountered, try loosening umbilical tape,
applying steady and gentle pressure, or manipulating the angle of the umbilical cord to the skin. Often the catheter cannot be advanced because of the creation of a "false luminal tract." There should be good blood return when the catheter enters the iliac artery.
g. Confirm catheter tip position with x-ray or ultrasound. Secure catheter with a suture through the cord, a marker tape, and a tape bridge. The catheter may be pulled back but not advanced once the sterile field is broken.
h. Observe for complications: Blanching or cyanosis of lower extremi- ties, perforation, thrombosis, embolism, or infection. If any complica- tions occur, the catheter should be removed.
i. Use isotonic fluids containing heparin per institutional policy. Never use hypoosmolar fluids in the UA.
6. Procedure for UVC line (see Fig. 4.5):
a. Determine the desired length and follow steps "a" through "d" for UA catheter placement.
b. Isolate the thin-walled UV, clear thrombi with forceps, and insert catheter, aiming the tip toward the right shoulder. Gently advance the catheter to the desired distance. Do not force. If resistance is encountered, try loosening the umbilical tape, applying steady and gentle pressure, or manipulating the angle of the umbilical cord to the skin. Resistance is commonly met at the abdominal wall and again at the portal system. Do not infuse anything into the liver.
c. Confirm catheter tip position with x-ray or ultrasound. Secure catheter with a suture through the cord, a marker tape, and a tape bridge. The catheter may be pulled back but not advanced once the sterile field is broken.
7. A video on UVC/UAC line placement is available on the New England Journal of Medicine's website.

 VI. PULMONARY PROCEDURES	
A. Use of Metered-Dose Inhalers and Spacer6
1. Indications: Delivery of medication to distal airways in the lungs.
2. Complications: Failure of medication delivery. Note that there are risks associated with the medication rather than the delivery method.
3. Procedure:
a. Shake the inhaler, remove the cap, and attach it to the spacer device.
b. Instruct the child to exhale completely.
c. Place the mouthpiece of the spacer into the patient's mouth, and instruct the child to make a complete seal with the lips. Alternatively, a spacer with a mask can be placed over the child's mouth if they are unable to make a seal with their lips.


d. Spray 1 puff from the inhaler into the spacer and instruct the patient to breathe slowly and deeply, holding the breath for 10 seconds.
e. Wait 1 minute and repeat as indicated.
B. Needle Cricothyrotomy6,14
1. Indications: When an emergency airway is required and the clinician is unable to use bag-mask ventilation or secure an orotracheal or
nasotracheal airway. Common indications include facial fractures, blood or vomitus in the airway, airway obstruction (e.g., foreign body, tumor, edema from trauma).
2. Contraindications: No absolute contraindications. Relative contraindi- cations include unable to locate landmarks, laryngotracheal damage, coagulopathy, bleeding dyscrasia.
3. Complications: Bleeding, hypoxia, pneumothorax, esophageal lacera- tion, vocal cord injury, posterior tracheal wall perforation, infection.
4. Procedure:
a. Immobilize the larynx with the nondominant hand and identify the cricothyroid membrane. This is located by palpating the laryngeal prominence at midline of the thyroid cartilage and then moving distally 1 to 2 cm to a small depression. This depression overlies the cricothyroid membrane.
b. Insert a 12 to 14-gauge angiocatheter caudally at a 30- to 45-degree angle through the cricothyroid membrane while aspirating the needle as it is inserted.
c. Attach the needle to an oxygen source that can deliver roughly 30 psi. Alternatively, a bag-valve device can be connected using a 7.0 endotracheal tube adapter and a 3 mL syringe with plunger removed.
d. Intermittent ventilation can be achieved by cutting a small hole in the oxygen tubing, and covering the hole in the tubing. Allow for expira- tion by uncovering the hole for 4 to 10 seconds.
C. Needle Thoracostomy2,15
1. Indications: Evacuation of a pneumothorax, hemothorax, chylotho- rax, large pleural effusion, or empyema for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes.
2. Complications: Infection, bleeding, pneumothorax, hemothorax, pulmo- nary contusion or laceration, puncture of diaphragm, spleen, or liver, or bronchopleural fistula.
3. Procedure:
a. Prepare and drape the skin as clean as possible, with goal of sterility.
b. Insert a large-bore angiocatheter (14- to 22-gauge based on patient size and likely depth of the chest wall) into the anterior second inter- costal space in the midclavicular line. Insert needle over superior aspect of rib margin to avoid neurovascular structures. If the angio- catheter permits, a 3- to 10-mL syringe with 1 to 2 mL of saline can be connected to it. Aspirating the syringe while inserting the IV will pull air bubbles through the saline if an air collection exists. A rush of bubbles signifies successful access.


c. When pleural space is entered, withdraw needle and attach catheter to a three-way stopcock and syringe, and aspirate air. The stopcock is used to stop air flow through the catheter when sufficient evacua- tion has been performed.
d. Subsequent insertion of a chest tube is often necessary for ongoing release of air. It is advised not to completely evacuate chest prior to placement of chest tube to avoid pleural injury.
4. A video on needle decompression of spontaneous pneumothorax is avail- able on the New England Journal of Medicine's website.

 VII. GASTROINTESTINAL PROCEDURES	
A. Nasogastric Tube Placement6,16
1. Indications: Enteral nutrition, administration of medications, treatment of ileus or obstruction, gastric decompression.
2. Contraindications: Esophageal stricture, esophageal varices, severe mid- face trauma (cribriform plate disruption), bleeding diatheses, alkaline ingestion.
3. Complications: Malposition, coiling of tube, esophageal perforation, pneumothorax.
4. Procedure:
a. Approximate the length of 6- to 10-Fr tube insertion by positioning the tube from the nares or mouth to the ear, then to the mid-xyphoid- umbilicus. Mark this length on the tube with marker.
b. The patient should be sitting as upright as possible. The head should be tilted toward the chest.
c. Lubricate the tube and insert the tube through the nose. Advance the tube to the length mark, asking the patient to swallow while the tube is inserted. It may be helpful to provide a cup of water with a straw.
d. Confirm placement of the tube with a radiograph of the lower chest/ upper abdomen. Ensure that the tube is located distal to the carina, crosses the diaphragm, and rests in a central position in the gastric region. The tube should not cross the midline. Additional confirma- tion can be obtained by testing the pH of aspirated contents. A of pH 1 to 4 confirms proper positioning. Alternatively, insert a small amount of air (20 to 30 mL) through the tube while listening to the gastric area with a stethoscope.
e. Secure the tube.
B. Gastrostomy Tube Replacement6,17
1. Indications: Dislodged, blocked, or replacement of gastrostomy tube (G-tube) or gastrostomy button.
2. Complications: Perforation, bleeding, pneumoperitoneum, creation of "false track" particularly if tube is newly placed. Note that misplacement and associated complications are rare for children with a mature G-tube track undergoing tube replacement in a pediatric emergency room.


3. Procedure:
a. Deflate balloon completely with a syringe and pull the tube out steadily.
b. Insert new tube in the stoma and inflate balloon fully with water. Gently tug on the tube to assess whether the balloon is inflated. Secure the tube.
c. Confirm intragastric placement by aspirating gastric contents.
d. If replacement tube is not immediately available, a Foley catheter of simi- lar size may be placed using the method above to maintain tract patency.
e. If the G-tube track is too constricted for placement of G-tube, con- sider upsizing with Foley catheter serial dilation.
4. A video on gastrostomy tube exchange is available on the New England Journal of Medicine's website.

 VIII. GENITOURINARY PROCEDURES	
A. Urinary Bladder Catheterization3,6,18
1. Indications: To obtain urine for urinalysis and sterile culture, to accu- rately monitor hydration status, and bladder decompression.
2. Complications: Hematuria, infection, trauma to urethra or bladder, intra- vesical knot of catheter (rarely occurs).
3. Contraindications: Pelvic fractures, known trauma to the urethra, or blood at the meatus.
4. Catheter Selection: 5 Fr for children younger than 6 months; 8 Fr for children between 6 months and adolescence; 10 Fr for adolescents.
5. Procedure:
a. For collection of urinalysis and/or urine culture, the infant/child should not have voided within 1 hour of procedure.
b. Prepare the urethral opening using sterile technique.
c. In males, apply gentle traction to the penis to straighten the urethra. In uncircumcised male infants, expose the meatus with gentle retrac- tion of the foreskin. The foreskin has to be retracted only far enough to visualize the meatus.
d. In girls, the urethral orifice may be difficult to visualize, but it is usu- ally immediately superoanterior to the vaginal orifice.
e. Gently insert a lubricated catheter into the urethra. Slowly advance catheter until resistance is met at the external sphincter. Continued pressure will overcome this resistance, and the catheter will enter the bladder. Only a few centimeters of advancement are required to reach the bladder in girls. In boys, insert a few centimeters longer than the shaft of the penis.
f. Carefully remove the catheter once specimen is obtained, and cleanse skin of iodine.
g. If indwelling Foley catheter is inserted, inflate balloon with sterile water or saline as indicated on bulb, then connect catheter to drain- age tubing attached to urine drainage bag. Secure catheter tubing to inner thigh.


6. Videos on catheterization of the male urethra and catheterization of the female urethra are available on the New England Journal of Medicine's website.
B. Suprapubic Bladder Aspiration2
1. Indications: To obtain urine in a sterile manner for urinalysis and culture in children younger than 2 years (avoid in children with genitourinary tract anomalies, coagulopathy, or intestinal obstruction). This bypasses distal urethra, thereby minimizing risk for contamination.
2. Complications: Infection (cellulitis), hematuria (usually microscopic), intestinal perforation.
3. Procedure (Fig. 4.6):
a. Anterior rectal pressure in girls or gentle penile pressure in boys may be used to prevent urination during the procedure. Child should not have voided within 1 hour of procedure.
b. Restrain child in the supine, frog leg position. Prepare suprapubic area in a sterile fashion.
c. The site for puncture is 1 to 2 cm above the symphysis pubis in the midline. Use a syringe with a 22-gauge, 1-inch needle, and puncture at a 10- to 20-degree angle to the perpendicular, aiming slightly caudad.
d. Ultrasound guidance:
(1) Ultrasound can be used to visualize the urinary bladder for this procedure as follows: Use the curvilinear or linear probe. Apply the probe in transverse position in the midline of the lower abdo- men, positioning it to locate the bladder. The bladder is a midline structure with a dark center and bright margins. The shape of the bladder is usually rounded; however, it can appear spherical, pyramidal, or even cuboidal (Fig. 4.7).
(2) The bladder may be empty as well with no dark cavity. If no clear structure, give fluids and reassess in 30 minutes. This technique can also be used in the evaluation of anuric patients, to differen- tiate between decreased urine production and urinary retention. This is also useful in the case of patients with a urinary catheter as the catheter is usually visible. If it is visualized and the blad- der also has urine around it, the catheter is likely malfunctioning.
(3) Aspiration can be performed after marking the site with ultra- sound, proceeding with preparing and draping the patient and proceeding to puncture.
e. Gently exert suction as the needle is advanced until urine enters syringe. The needle should not be advanced more than 3 cm. Aspirate urine with gentle suction.
f. Remove needle, cleanse skin of iodine, and apply a sterile bandage.
4. A video of suprapubic bladder aspiration is available on the New England Journal of Medicine's website.





































 FIGURE 4.6 
Landmarks for suprapubic bladder aspiration. (Modified from Dieckmann R, Fiser D, Selbst S. Pediatric Emergency and Critical Care Procedures. St. Louis: Mosby; 1997.)



 FIGURE 4.7 
Ultrasound of bladder. In this transverse midline view of the pelvis the bladder appears black (anechoic) and cuboid in the midline. This is the typical appearance of a full blad- der on ultrasound, although the shape may vary. (From Leeson K, Leeson B. Pediatric ultrasound: applications in the emergency department. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2013;31(3):809-829.)

 IX. MUSCULOSKELETAL PROCEDURES	
A. Basic Splinting2
1. Indications: To provide short-term stabilization of limb injuries while accommodating swelling associated with acute injuries.
2. Complications: Pressure sores, dermatitis, neurovascular impairment.
3. Procedure:
a. Determine style of splint needed (see Section IX.B).
b. Measure and cut fiberglass or plaster to appropriate length. If using plaster, upper-extremity splints require 8 to 10 layers and lower- extremity splints require 12 to 14 layers.
c. Pad extremity with copious cotton roll padding, taking care to overlap each turn by 50%. In prepackaged fiberglass splints, additional padding is not generally required. Bony prominences may require additional padding. Place cotton between digits if they are in a splint.
d. Immerse plaster slabs into room temperature water until bubbling stops. Smooth out wet plaster slab, avoiding any wrinkles. Fiberglass splints will harden when exposed to air; however, application of a small amount of room temperature water can accelerate this process.
e. Position splint over extremity and mold to desired contour. Wrap with an elastic bandage to hold molded splint onto extremity in position of


function. Continue to hold desired form of splint upon extremity until fully hardened.
f. NOTE: Plaster becomes warm while drying. Using warm water will decrease drying time. This may result in inadequate time to mold splint. Turn edge of the splint back on itself to produce a smooth surface. Take care to cover the sharp edges of fiberglass.
g. Use crutches or slings as indicated.
h. The need for orthopedic referral should be individually assessed.
i. Emergent orthopedic referral may be required, including when there is concern for neurovascular compromise or compartment syndrome of the affected extremity.
4. Postsplint Care:
a. Standard rest, ice, and elevation of affected extremity should be performed.
b. Avoid weight bearing on splinted extremity.
c. Do not get splint wet. Splints can be wrapped in water-resistant items such as a plastic bag or a specially designed splint bag to allow for showering. Use a hair dryer in instances where the splint has acci- dentally gotten wet.
d. Do not stick items such as a pen or clothes hanger to scratch inside the splint.
e. If areas in or distal to the splint develop numbness, tingling, increased pain, turn blue or pale, or become swollen, patient should loosen the elastic bandage of the splint. Instruct to seek immediate medical care if this does not quickly (<30 minutes) resolve these symptoms.
5. A video on basic splinting techniques is available on the New England Journal of Medicine's website.
B. Selected Splints and Indications (Fig. 4.8)
1. Long Arm Posterior Splint
a. Indications: Immobilization of elbow and forearm injuries.
b. Procedure: Elbow flexed at 90 degrees, forearm in neutral position, slight dorsiflexion of the wrist. Splint extends from palmar crease of the hand to mid upper arm along the ulnar side of the forearm and the posterior aspect of the humerus. Width should be semicircumferential.
2. Sugar Tong Forearm Splint
a. Indications: For distal radius and wrist fractures; to immobilize the elbow and minimize pronation and supination.
b. Procedure: Elbow flexed at 90 degrees, forearm in neutral position, and slight dorsiflexion of the wrist. Splint extends from palmar crease along volar aspect of forearm, around elbow, and dorsally to the metacarpals. Fingers and thumb remain free. Width should support arm on both sides but not overlap.
3. Ulnar Gutter Splint
a. Indications: Nonrotated fourth or fifth (boxer) metacarpal metaphy- seal fracture with less than 20 degrees of angulation, uncomplicated fourth and fifth phalangeal fracture.




Completed


A







B
F



C





D
G



E

 FIGURE 4.8 
Selected splint types. Light purple layer is stockinette, white layer is cotton roll, dark purple layer is the splint. (A) Long arm posterior splint. (B) Sugar tong forearm splint.
(C) Ulnar gutter splint. (D). Thumb spica splint. (E) Volar splint. (F) Posterior ankle splint. (G) Ankle stirrup splint.


b. Assess for malrotation, displacement (especially Salter I type frac- ture), angulation, and joint stability before splinting.
c. Procedure: Elbow in neutral position, wrist in slight dorsiflexion, metacarpophalangeal (MP) joint at 60 to 90 degrees, interpha- langeal (IP) joint at 20 degrees. Apply splint in U shape from the tip of the fifth digit to 3 cm distal to the volar crease of the elbow. Splint should be wide enough to enclose the fourth and fifth digits.
4. Thumb Spica Splint
a. Indications: Nonrotated, nonangulated, nonarticular fractures of the thumb metacarpal or phalanx, ulnar collateral ligament injury (game- keeper's or skier's thumb), scaphoid fracture or suspected scaphoid fracture (pain in anatomic snuff box).
b. Procedure: Wrist in slight dorsiflexion, thumb in some flexion and abduction, IP joint in slight flexion. Apply splint in U shape along radial side of forearm extending from tip of thumb to mid-forearm. Mold the splint along the long axis of the thumb so that thumb position is maintained. This will result in a spiral configuration along the forearm with maintained apposition of the index finger and thumb.
5. Volar Splint
a. Indications: Wrist immobilization for wrist sprains, strains, or certain fractures.
b. Procedure: Wrist in slight dorsiflexion. Apply splint on palmar surface from the MP joint to 2 to 3 cm distal to the volar crease of the elbow. It is useful to curve the splint to allow the MP joint to rest at an 80- to 90-degree angle.
6. Posterior Ankle Splint
a. Indications: Immobilization of ankle sprains and fractures of the foot, ankle, and distal fibula.
b. Procedure: Place patient in prone position with ipsilateral knee flexed at 90 degrees and affected ankle held in flexion at 90 degrees. Splint should extend from base of toes to upper portion of the calf. Width should match that of the foot. An ankle stirrup (sugar tong) splint can be added to increase stability for ankle fractures.
7. Ankle Stirrup Splint
a. Indications: Immobilization of the ankle.
b. Procedure: Ankle held in flexion at 90 degrees. Splint extends in U-shaped fashion from fibular head underneath the ankle to just
below the knee. Width should be one half of the narrowest circumfer- ence of the lower leg and not overlapping. May be used alone or in combination with (placed after) posterior ankle splint.
C. Radial Head Subluxation (Nursemaid's Elbow) Reduction19
1. Presentation: Commonly occurs in children aged 1 to 4 years with a history of inability to use an arm after it was pulled. Child presents with affected arm held at the side in pronation, with elbow slightly flexed.


2. Caution: Rule out a fracture clinically before doing procedure. Consider radiograph if mechanism of injury or history is atypical or if exam is concerning for fracture (swelling, bruising, tenderness, etc.).
3. Procedure:
a. Two most common techniques include hyperpronation (HP) and traditional supination-flexion (SF) maneuvers. Recent meta-analyses of randomized trials evaluating the two techniques favor HP for both efficacy and pain tolerance.
b. Support the elbow with one hand, and place your thumb laterally over the radial head at the elbow applying pressure medially. With your other hand, grasp the child's hand in a handshake position or at the wrist. The child's thumb should point downward.
c. HP method: Forcefully pronate the wrist. You may feel a click as reduction occurs.
d. SF method: Quickly and deliberately supinate and externally rotate the forearm, and simultaneously flex the elbow.
e. Most children will begin to use the arm within 15 minutes, some immediately after reduction. If reduction occurs after a prolonged period of subluxation, it may take the child longer to recover use of the arm. In this case, the arm should be immobilized with a posterior splint.
f. If procedure is unsuccessful, consider obtaining a radiograph. Maneuver may be repeated if needed.
4. A video on reduction of nursemaid's elbow is available on the New England Journal of Medicine's website.
D. Finger/Toe Dislocation Reduction2
1. Indications: IP and MP/metatarsophalangeal dislocations.
2. Complications: Fracture of phalanges, entrapment of neurovascular structures.
3. Cautions: Volar dislocations and dorsal dislocations with interposition of the volar plate or entrapment of the metacarpal/metatarsal head often cannot be performed using closed reduction.
4. Procedure:
a. Evaluate for neurovascular compromise in the affected digit. Perform radiographs to evaluate for possible fracture.
b. Consider procedural sedation or a digital block prior to procedure.
c. Grasp the digit proximal to fracture to allow for stabilization.
d. Grasp the tip of the distal digit and apply longitudinal traction, with the joint typically slipping into place.
e. Alternatively, grasp the distal phalanx and mildly hyperextend to accentuate the deformity while applying longitudinal traction.
f. After reduction, again evaluate neurovascular status and obtain radiographs to ensure proper position and to further evaluate for fracture.
g. Immobilize the joint using a padded splint using full extension for distal IP joints and 20 to 30 degrees of flexion for proximal IP joints.


E. Knee Arthrocentesis2
1. Indications: Evaluation of fluid for the diagnosis of disease, including infectious, inflammatory, and crystalline disease, and removal of fluid for relief of pain and/or functional limitation.
2. Contraindications: Bleeding diathesis, local fracture, overlying skin infection.
3. Complications: Pain, bleeding, infection.
4. Procedure:
a. Place child supine on exam table with knee in slight flexion, with use of a padded roll underneath the knee for support, if unable to slightly flex.
b. The lateral or medial approach can be made, with the lateral approach preferred to avoid the vastus medialis muscle.
c. The puncture point should be at the posterior margin of the patella in both cases.
d. Prepare the overlying skin in a sterile fashion, and once cleaned, numb the area using 1% lidocaine with a small-gauge needle. Then, using an 18-gauge needle attached to a syringe, puncture the skin at a 10- to 20-degree downward angle, and advance under continuous syringe suction until fluid is withdrawn, indicating entry into the joint space.
e. In large effusions, several syringes may be needed for complete fluid removal if so desired, and the needle may have to be redirected to access pockets of fluid.
f. Upon completion, withdraw the needle and cover the wound with a sterile gauze dressing.
g. Synovial fluid can then be sent for studies as indicated.
5. A video on knee arthrocentesis is available on the New England Journal of Medicine's website.
F. Hematoma Blocks20
1. Indications: Analgesia for closed fracture of the extremity that requires manipulation or closed reduction. It is an alternative when procedural sedation is not possible or is impractical.
2. Contraindications: Allergic reactions to local anesthetic agents, open fracture, cellulitis overlying fracture site, presence of a neurovascular deficit or vascular deficit.
3. Complications: Rare, but include compartment syndrome, local anes- thetic toxicity (circumoral and tongue numbness, dizziness, tinnitus, and visual disturbances), and osteomyelitis.
4. Procedure:
a. Perform using aseptic technique.
b. Draw up the local anesthetic solution into a syringe with a 22- or
23-gauge, 2-inch-long needle. Bupivacaine, for postprocedure anal- gesia, is desired and can be used alone or mixed with lidocaine in a 50:50 ratio. (See Chapter 6 for dosage maximum.)
c. Place a wheal of 1% lidocaine subcutaneously over the fracture site. Allow 1 to 2 minutes for the anesthetic to take effect.


d. Slowly insert and advance the needle attached to the local anesthetic solution through the skin wheal and aimed at the fracture site. C-arm fluoroscopy can aid fracture/hematoma localization. Slowly advance the needle.
(1) Aspirate with the syringe to ensure there is no free flow of blood, which indicates that the needle is within a blood vessel. If there is free blood flow, do not inject the local anesthetic solution.
(2) A flash, without flow, of blood indicates entry of the tip of the needle into the hematoma.
(3) Redirect needle if you strike bone or if no flash of blood is returned.
e. Once flash, without flow, is obtained, slowly inject the local anesthetic solution into the hematoma.
f. Reposition the needle to different areas within the hematoma and inject small amounts of the local anesthetic into each area. This technique distributes the local anesthetic solution to increase the efficacy of the hematoma block and minimizes the risk of intravascu- lar injection of the entire dose of local anesthetic.
g. Withdraw the needle, apply a bandage to the skin puncture site, and await analgesia.

 X. SKIN/DERMATOLOGIC PROCEDURES	
A. Immunization and Medication Administration3
NOTE: Please see Chapters 16 and 30 for relevant vaccines and medica- tions and their appropriate administration routes.
1. Subcutaneous Injections
a. Indications: Immunizations and medications.
b. Complications: Bleeding, infection, allergic reaction, lipohypertrophy or lipoatrophy after repeated injections.
c. Procedure:
(1) Locate injection site: Upper outer arm or outer aspect of upper thigh.
(2) Cleanse skin with alcohol.
(3) Insert 0.5-inch, 25- or 27-gauge needle into subcutaneous layer at a 45-degree angle to the skin. Aspirate for blood, if none pres- ent, inject medication/immunization.
2. Intramuscular (IM) Injections
a. Indications: Immunizations and other medications.
b. Complications: Bleeding, infection, allergic reaction, nerve injury.
c. Cautions
(1) Avoid IM injections in a child with a bleeding disorder or thrombocytopenia.
(2) Maximum volume to be injected is 0.5 mL in a small infant, 1 mL in an older infant, 2 mL in a school-aged child, and 3 mL in an adolescent.


d. Procedure
(1) Locate injection site: Anterolateral upper thigh in smaller child or outer aspect of upper arm (deltoid) in older one. The dorsal gluteal region is less commonly used because of risk for nerve or vascular injury. To find the ventral gluteal site, form a triangle by placing your index finger on the anterior iliac spine and your middle finger on the most superior aspect of the iliac crest. The
injection should occur in the middle of the triangle formed by the two fingers and the iliac crest.
(2) Cleanse skin with alcohol.
(3) Pinch muscle with free hand, and insert 1-inch, 23- or 25-gauge needle until hub is flush with skin surface. For deltoid and ven- tral gluteal muscles, needle should be perpendicular to skin. For anterolateral thigh, needle should be at a 45-degree angle to the long axis of the thigh. Aspirate for blood; if none present, inject medication.
B. Basic Laceration Repair2
1. Wound Irrigation21,22: Numerous studies, including a large Cochrane review, conclude that there is no difference in the infection rates of wounds irrigated with either tap water or sterile NS. The volume of irrigation depends on the location and size of the wound; 100 mL/1 cm of laceration is a good approximation for relatively uncontaminated wounds.
2. Suturing:
a. Basic Suturing Technique (Fig. 4.9):
(1) Simple interrupted: Basic closure of most uncomplicated wounds.
(2) Horizontal mattress: Provides eversion of wound edges.
(3) Vertical mattress: For added strength in areas of thick skin or areas of skin movement; provides eversion of wound edges.
(4) Running intradermal: For cosmetic closures.
(5) Deep dermal: For bringing together deeper portions of wounds with dissolving sutures to allow improved approximation and closure of superficial surfaces.
b. Procedure:
(1) See Tables 4.1-4.3 for sutures material, size, and time for removal.23
(2) NOTE: Lacerations of the face, lips, hands, genitalia, mouth, or periorbital area may require consultation with a specialist. Ideally, lacerations at increased risk for infection (areas with poor blood supply, contaminated, or crush injury) should be sutured within 6 hours of injury. Clean wounds in cosmetically important areas may be closed up to 24 hours after injury in the absence of significant contamination or devitalization. In general, bite wounds should not be sutured except in areas










A






B





C







D
 FIGURE 4.9 
A-D, Suture techniques. (A) Simple interrupted. (B) Vertical mattress. (C) Horizontal mattress. (D) Deep dermal. (Modified from Srivastava D, Taylor RS. Suturing technique and other closure materials. In: Robinson JK, Hanke CW, Siegel DM, et al., eds. Surgery of the Skin. 3rd ed. Elsevier: Philadelphia, PA; 2015:193-213.)

of high cosmetic importance (face) or if significant gaping is present. These wounds can be closed loosely to aid in healing by secondary intention. The longer sutures are left in place, the greater potential for scarring and infection. Sutures in




GUIDELINES FOR SUTURE MATERIAL, SIZE, AND REMOVAL23
Body RegionNonabsorbableAbsorbableDuration (Days)Scalp5-0 or 4-04-05-7Face6-05-03-5Eyelid7-0 or 6-0-3-5Eyebrow6-0 or 5-05-03-5Trunk5-0 or 4-03-05-7Extremities5-0 or 4-04-07-10Joint surface4-0-10-144Hand5-05-07Foot sole4-0 or 3-04-07-10TABLE 4.2CHARACTERISTICS OF COMMON ABSORBABLE SUTURES23
Material
Type
Tensile StrengthAbsorption Time (Weeks)
UsesVicrylBraided75% at 14 days8-10Subcutaneous50% at 21 daysclosure, vessel5% at 30 daysligatureVicryl rapideBraided50% at 5 days6Mucosa, dermis0 at 14 daysSurgical gutTwistedPoor at 7-10 days6-8SubcutaneousplainclosureSurgical gutTwistedPoor at 21-23 days8-10SubcutaneouschromicclosureMonocrylMonofilament60%-70% at 7 days13-17Subcuticular30%-40% at 14 daysTABLE 4.3CHARACTERISTICS OF COMMON NONABSORBABLE SUTURES23
Material	Type	Tensile Strength
NYLON (USED FOR SKIN CLOSURE)EthilonMonofilament20% per yearDermalonMonofilament20% per yearSurgilonBraidedGoodNurolonBraidedGoodPOLYPROLENE (USED FOR SCALP, EYEBROWS)ProleneMonofilamentPermanentSurgileneMonofilamentPermanent
cosmetically sensitive areas should be removed as soon as possible. Sutures in high tension areas (e.g., extensor surfaces) should stay in longer.
(3) Prepare child for procedure with appropriate sedation, analgesia, and restraint. Utilize Child Life or age-appropriate distraction.


(4) Anesthetize the wound with topical anesthetic or with lidocaine mixed with bicarbonate (with or without epinephrine) by injecting the anesthetic into the subcutaneous tissues (see Chapter 6).
(5) Forcefully irrigate the wound as per above. This is the most important step in preventing infection.
(6) Prepare and drape the patient for a sterile procedure.
(7) Débride the wound when indicated. Probe for foreign bodies as indicated. Consider obtaining a radiograph if a radiopaque foreign body is suspected.
(8) Select suture type for percutaneous closure (see Tables 4.1-4.3).
(9) Match layers of injured tissues. Carefully match the depth of the bite taken on each side of the wound when suturing. Take equal bites from both wound edges. Apply slight thumb pressure on the wound edge as the needle is entering the opposite side. Pull the sutures to approximate wound edges but not too tightly, to avoid tissue necrosis. In delicate areas, sutures should be approximately 2 mm apart and 2 mm from the wound edge.
Larger bites are acceptable where cosmesis is less important.2
(10) When suturing is complete, apply topical antibiotic and sterile dressing. If laceration is in proximity of a joint, splinting of the affected area to limit mobility often speeds healing and prevents wound dehiscence.
(11) Check wounds at 48 to 72 hours in cases where wounds are of questionable viability, if wound was packed, or for patients pre- scribed prophylactic antibiotics. Change dressing at checkup.
(12) For hand lacerations, close skin only; do not use subcutaneous stitches. Elevate and immobilize the hand. Consider consulting a hand or plastics specialist.
(13) Consider the need for tetanus prophylaxis (see Chapter 16).
c. A video on basic laceration repair is available on the New England Journal of Medicine's website
3. Skin Staples
a. Indications:
(1) Best for scalp, trunk, extremity lacerations.
(2) More rapid application than sutures, but can be more painful to remove.
(3) Lower rates of wound infection.
b. Contraindications:
(1) Not for areas that require meticulous cosmesis.
(2) Avoid in patients who require magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or CT.
c. Procedure:
(1) Apply topical anesthetic, as above. Injection of lidocaine is not routinely used when using staples.
(2) Clean and irrigate wound, as with suturing.


(3) Appose wound edges, press stapler firmly against skin at center of apposed edges, and staple.
(4) Apply antibiotic ointment and sterile bandage.
(5) Left in place for the same length of time as sutures (see Table 4.1).
(6) To remove, use dedicated staple remover.
4. Tissue Adhesives24
a. Indications:
(1) For use with superficial lacerations with clean edges.
(2) Excellent cosmetic results, ease of application, and reduced patient anxiety.
(3) Lower rates of wound infection.
b. Contraindications:
(1) Not for use in areas under large amounts of tension (e.g., hands, joints).
(2) Use caution with areas near the eye or over areas with hair such as the eyebrow.
c. Procedure:
(1) Use pressure to achieve hemostasis and clean the wound as explained previously.
(2) Hold together wound edges.
(3) Apply adhesive dropwise along the wound surface, avoiding applying adhesive to the inside of the wound. Hold in place for 20 to 30 seconds.
(4) If the wound is misaligned, remove the adhesive with forceps and reapply. Petroleum jelly or similar substance can aid in removal of skin adhesive.
(5) Adhesive will slough off after 7 to 10 days.
(6) Antibiotic ointments or other creams/lotions should not be applied to the adhesive, as this can cause premature loosening of the glue and subsequent wound dehiscence.
C. Incision and Drainage (I&D) of Abscess2
1. Indications: Diagnostic and therapeutic drainage of soft tissue abscess.
2. Complications: Inadequate abscess drainage, local tissue injury, pain, scar formation, and, in rare cases, fistula formation. Consider special- ized surgical evaluation for abscesses in cosmetically or anatomically sensitive areas such as the face, breast, or the anogenital region.
3. Ultrasound Identification: Ultrasound imaging can be used to differenti- ate cellulitis from abscess.
a. Use a linear probe, place the probe over the area of interest, and scan it systematically such that the entire area of interest is examined.
b. Cellulitis characteristics on ultrasound:
(1) Increased edema; tissue may appear slightly darker, and will have distorted, indistinct margins.
(2) Areas may have a "cobblestone" appearance caused by edema (Fig. 4.10).


c. Abscess characteristics on ultrasound:
(1) Dark fluid collection distinct from surrounding tissue (see Fig. 4.10).
(2) Often round or oval in shape.
(3) Doppler can help to distinguish between lymph nodes and fluid collections.


 FIGURE 4.10 
Ultrasound characteristics of soft tissue cellulitis and abscess. (A) Cellulitis character- ized by bright (hyperechoic) tissue due to edema and inflammation in the tissue. (B) This image demonstrates the classic "cobblestone" appearance which is a later ultra- sound finding in cellulitis.



 FIGURE 4.10, cont'd 
(C) A black (anechoic) rounded structure is noted in the soft tissue, which is charac- teristic of a soft tissue abscess. Some abscesses may appear dark gray depending on the characteristics of the fluid within the abscess. (From Leeson K, Leeson B. Pediatric ultrasound: applications in the emergency department. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2013;31(3):809-829.)



4. Procedure:
a. Consider procedural sedation based upon the child's expected tolerance of the procedure and the location/size/complexity of the abscess.
b. Apply topical anesthetic cream to the abscess to numb superficial epidermis (see Chapter 6).
c. Prepare the overlying skin in a sterile fashion, and once cleaned, numb the area using 1% lidocaine and a small gauge needle, per- forming first a circumferential field block of the abscess area followed by direct injection to the planned incision site.
d. Incise the skin over the abscess down to the superficial fascia using a scalpel blade, cutting parallel to the natural crease of the skin, if present.
e. Using a hemostat, bluntly widen and undermine the incision to break up any septations or loculated fluid collections. Vigorously irrigate the wound using sterile saline to improve removal of purulent material.
f. If desired, introduce a sterile packing strip into the wound using a hemostat, making sure to fill in an outside-to-inside pattern without overfilling.


g. Leave a 2- to 3-cm tail outside the wound to facilitate removal and cover the wound with an absorbent dressing. Packing material should be removed in 1 to 2 days with a minimum of daily dressing changes until healed.
h. Consider starting antibiotics that cover staphylococcus and strepto- coccal species per local guidelines and resistance patterns.
5. A video on I & D of Abscesses is available on the New England Journal of Medicine's website.
D. Soft Tissue Aspiration25
1. Indications: Cellulitis that is unresponsive to initial standard therapy, recurrent cellulitis or abscesses, immunocompromised patients in whom organism recovery is necessary and may affect antimicrobial therapy.
2. Complications: Pain, infection, bleeding.
3. Procedure:
a. Select site to aspirate at the point of maximal inflammation (more likely to increase recovery of causative agent than leading edge of erythema or center).
b. Cleanse area in a sterile fashion.
c. Local anesthesia with 1% lidocaine is optional.
d. Fill tuberculin syringe with 0.1 to 0.2 mL of nonbacteriostatic sterile saline, and attach to needle.
e. Using 18- or 20-gauge needle (22-gauge for facial cellulitis), advance to appropriate depth, inject saline, aspirate fluid, and apply negative pressure while withdrawing needle.
f. Send fluid from aspiration for Gram stain and cultures. If no fluid is obtained, needle can be streaked on agar plate. Consider acid-fast bacillus (AFB) and fungal stains in immunocompromised patients.
E. Tuberculin Skin Test Placement26
1. Indications: Concern for exposure to tuberculosis.
2. Contraindications: History of severe reactions to prior placements (e.g., necrosis, anaphylactic shock, ulcerations). Note that there is no contra- indication for any other individuals including infants, children, pregnant women, or persons who have been vaccinated with bacille Calmette-
Guérin (BCG). Note that although a tuberculin skin test (TST) may be placed on the same day as a receiving a live vaccine, a TST must
otherwise be placed 4 to 6 weeks after administration of a live vaccine (if not placed that same day).
3. Complications: Soreness, necrosis.
4. Procedure: Inject 0.1 mL of tuberculin purified protein derivative (PPD) with a tuberculin syringe (bevel up) into the forearm at a 5- to 15-degree angle. The bevel should be visible just below the skin sur- face. The injection should produce a pale elevation of the skin 6 to 10 mm in diameter.


5. Follow-Up: A TST should be read between 48 and 72 hours after admin- istration. The reaction is measured across the forearm (perpendicular
to the long axis) in millimeters of induration (palpable, raised, hardened area or swelling). Do not measure erythema.
6. Interpretation: see Chapter 17.
F. Tick Removal27
1. Indications: Visualization of tick. Urgent removal is essential, as the risk of Lyme disease transmission significantly increases after 24 hours of attachment with the risk highest at 48 to 72 hours.
2. Complications: Retention of tick fragments (particularly mouthparts), infection, granuloma formation.
3. Procedure: Only the use of blunt, medium-tipped, angled forceps or protected fingers have been shown to result in effective removal of ticks.
a. Use blunt forceps to grasp the tick at the skin surface. Lift up firmly, applying steady pressure and without a twisting motion. Take care to not squeeze the body of the tick, because its fluid may leak infec- tious material.
b. Apply antiseptic solution to the attachment site and provide patients with signs and symptoms of both local and systemic illness.

 REFERENCES	
A complete list of references can be found online at www.expertconsult.com.

This page intentionally left blank


 XI. ONLINE CONTENT	
A. Ultrasound-Guided Lumbar Puncture
1. Use the linear probe. Before preparing the patient, obtain a transverse view of the spine perpendicular to its axis. In the transverse view, identify the anatomic midline by locating the spinous process. The peri- osteum of the spinous process will appear as a hyperechoic, rounded structure with dark, posterior shadowing. Center the spinous process in the middle of the probe and mark a line in a cephalad-caudad direction on the patient's back to identify the midline (Fig. EC 4.A).
2. Rotate the probe 90 degrees to obtain a longitudinal view (probe parallel to the spine). Identify the vertebral bodies and an intervertebral space above or below L4. Mark a line on either side of the skin correlating with the space (Fig. EC 4.B).
3. The intersection of the marks identifies the area to be punctured. The crosshairs formed by the marks should leave the actual insertion site clean (Fig. EC 4.C).
4. The procedure should progress with no further movement of the patient. Preparation and draping should proceed from this point toward comple- tion of the procedure.


 FIGURE EC 4.A 
Transverse ultrasound view of the lumbar spine. The spinous process is labeled in this ultrasound image of the lumbar spine, marking the anatomic midline for a lumbar puncture. A marking line should be drawn in the cephalad-caudad direction on the skin over the spinous processes. (From Marin J. Novel applications in pediatric emergency ultrasound. Clin Pediatr Emerg Med. 2011;12[1]:53-64.)



 FIGURE EC 4.B 
Longitudinal ultrasound view of the spine. The spinous processes are visualized as hyperechoic (bright) lines with posterior shadowing. In between the rounded spinous process is the interspinous space, which should be marked with a line for the proce- dure. (From Marin J. Novel applications in pediatric emergency ultrasound. Clin Pediatr Emerg Med. 2011;12[1]:53-64.)

 FIGURE EC 4.C 
Lumbar area marked for lumbar puncture. The lines from ultrasound markings should make a cross as seen in this image. Ideally there will be an area free of marking in the center where the actual puncture site will be. (From Strony R. Ultrasound-assisted lumbar puncture in obese patients. Crit Care Clin. 2010;26[4]:661-664.)


B. External Jugular Puncture and Catheterization2
1. Indications: Blood sampling in patients with inadequate peripheral vascular access or during resuscitation.
2. Complications: Infection, bleeding, pneumothorax.
3. Procedure: (Fig. EC 4.D)
a. Restrain patient securely with head turned 45 degrees to the contra- lateral side of cannulation. Position with towel roll under shoulders or with head over side of bed to extend neck and accentuate the posterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid muscle on the side of venipuncture. Place patient in the 15- to 20-degree Trendelenburg position.
b. Prepare area in a sterile fashion.
c. The external jugular vein will distend if its most proximal segment is occluded or if the child cries. The vein runs from the angle of the mandible to the posterior border of the lower third of the sternoclei- domastoid muscle.


 FIGURE EC 4.D 
External jugular catheterization. (From Dieckmann R, Fiser D, Selbst S. Illustrated Textbook of Pediatric Emergency and Critical Care Procedures. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 1997.)


d. With continuous negative suction on the syringe, insert the needle at approximately a 30-degree angle to the skin. Continue as with any peripheral venipuncture.
e. Apply a sterile dressing, and put pressure on the puncture site for 5 minutes.
f. Enter the vein at the point where it crosses the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
g. Proceed with peripheral catheter placement as described previously.


 REFERENCES	
1. Coté CJ, Wilson S. Guidelines for monitoring and management of pediatric patients before, during, and after sedation for diagnostic and therapeutic proce- dures: update 2016. Pediatrics. 2016;138(1).
2. Mittiga MR, Ruddy RM. Procedures. In: Shaw KN, Bachur RG, eds. Fleisher & Ludwig's Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Medicine, 7e. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2016.
3. Dieckmann R, Fiser D, Selbst S. Illustrated Textbook of Pediatric Emergency and Critical Care Procedures. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 1997.
4. Schwartz SR, Magit AE, Rosenfeld RM, et al. Clinical practice guideline (update): earwax (cerumen impaction). Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2017;156(suppl 1).
5. Aaron K, Cooper TE, Warner L, et al. Ear drops for the removal of ear wax.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018;7:CD012171.
6. Goodman DM. Current Procedures: Pediatrics. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2007.
7. Kadish HA, Corneli HM. Removal of nasal foreign bodies in the pediatric popu- lation. Am J Emerg Med. 1997;15(1):54.
8. Béquignon E, Teissier N, Gauthier A, et al. Emergency Department care of child- hood epistaxis. Emerg Med J. 2017;34(8):543.
9. Campbell M, Buitrago SR. BET 2: Ice water immersion, other vagal manoeuvres or adenosine for SVT in children. Emerg Med J. 2017 Jan;34(1):58-60.
10. Appelboam A, Reuben A, Mann C, et al. Postural modification to the standard Valsalva manoeuvre for emergency treatment of supraventricular tachycardias (REVERT): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2015;386(10005):1747.
11. Pasquier M, Clair M, Pruvot E, et al. Carotid sinus massage. N Engl J Med. 2017;377(15):e21.
12. Barone MA. Pediatric procedures. In: Oski's Pediatrics: Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006:2671-2687.
13. Amjad I, Murphy T, Nylander-Housholder L, et al. A new approach to manage- ment of intravenous infiltration in pediatric patients: pathophysiology, classifica- tion, and treatment. J Infus Nurse. 2011;34(4):242-249.
14. Schroeder AA. Cricothyroidotomy: when, why, and why not? Am J Otolaryngol. 2000;21(3):195.
15. Nichols DG, Yaster M, Lappe DG, et al. Golden Hour: The Handbook of Advanced Pediatric Life Support. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1996.
16. Irving SY, Lyman B, Northington L, et al. Nasogastric tube placement and verifi- cation in children. Nutr Clin Pract. 2014;29(3):267-276.
17. Showalter CD, Kerrey B, Spellman-Kennebeck S. Gastrostomy tube replacement in a pediatric ED: frequency of complications and impact of confirmatory imag- ing. Am J Emerg Med. 2012;30(8):1501-1506.


18. Faase MA, Maizels M. Catheterization of the urethra in girls. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(19):1849.
19. Bexkens R, Washburn FJ, Eygendaal D, et al. Effectiveness of reduction maneu- vers in the treatment of nursemaid's elbow: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Am J Emerg Med. 2017;35(1):159-163.
20. Graham TP. Hematoma blocks. In: Reichman EF, ed. Reichman's Emergency Medicine Procedures, 3e. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2019.
21. Fernandez R, Griffiths R. Water for wound cleaning. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;2:CD003861.
22. Weiss EA, Oldham G, Lin M, Foster T, Quinn JV. Water is a safe and effective alternative to sterile normal saline for wound irrigation prior to suturing: a pro- spective, double-blind, randomized, controlled clinical trial. BMJ Open. 2013;3(1).
23. Maas CS. Sutures and needles. In: Wound Management and Suturing Manual. Alexandria: American Academy of Facial Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery; 2017:27-28.
24. Hines EQ, Klein BL, Cohen JS. Glue adhesives for repairing minor skin lacera- tions. Contemporary Pediatrics Online. 2012;31.
25. Howe PM, Eduardo Fajardo J, Orcutt MA. Etiologic diagnosis of cellulitis: com- parison of aspirates obtained from the leading edge and the point of maximal inflammation. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1987;6:685-686.
26. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Fact sheets: Tuberculin skin testing. 2016. 2018;24. https://www.cdc.gov/tb/publications/factsheets/testing/skintestin g.htm.
27. Gammons M, Salam G. Tick removal. Am Fam Physician. 2002;66(4):643-645.

Chapter 5
Adolescent Medicine
Christine Krueger, MD and Harita Shah, MD

 See additional content on Expert Consult

 I. ADOLESCENT HEALTH MAINTENANCE	
A. Confidentiality
Begin integrating one-on-one time with the provider and patient into ado- lescent visits as early as age 11 to provide teens with regular opportunities to discuss concerns and sensitive topics in an open manner.1 Adolescents are concerned about the confidentiality of their interactions with healthcare
providers.2,3 Providers should be aware of barriers to confidentiality related to consent laws and billing/explanation of benefits by insurance companies.4
1. Consent laws: All states and the District of Columbia allow minors to consent to sexually transmitted infection (STI) services (diagnosis and treatment), although some states have a minimum age to consent. Laws surrounding consent to HIV testing and treatment, contraception, abortion, and other healthcare services vary by state. Current informa- tion on consent laws by state can be found at the Guttmacher Institute's website (https://www.guttmacher.org/state-policy/explore/overview- minors-consent-law).5
2. Breach of confidentiality: Confidentiality must be breached if the adolescent is at risk of harming themselves or others (e.g., suicidal or homicidal ideation). Cases of child abuse or neglect must be reported to child protective services. The definition of statutory rape and report-
ing laws vary by state, with minimum age to consent to sexual activity ranging from 16 to 18 years old. Current information on reporting laws by state can be found at the Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network's website (https://rainn.org/public-policy-action).6
B. History Elements Unique to the Adolescent Patient
1. Psychosocial development7: Progression through adolescence is charac- terized by cognitive, psychosocial, and emotional developments, which help adolescents to establish their identity and autonomy. See Table EC
5.A for detailed psychosocial development by age.
2. HEADSS assessment8-10: A screening tool for psychosocial factors, which impact adolescent mental, physical, and sexual health (Box 5.1).
3. Screening, brief intervention, and referral to treatment (SBIRT) for substance use11:
a. Screening: If adolescent has used any alcohol, marijuana, or other drugs in the past 12 months, administer CRAFFT questionnaire (Box 5.2). If not, administer only the "Car" question (Have you ever ridden in a car
with a driver who had used alcohol or drugs?).

102	Part II Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information

BOX 5.1
HE2ADS3 (MODIFIED HEADSS) ASSESSMENT8
(H)OME: Household composition, family dynamics and relationships, living and sleeping arrangements, recent changes, any periods of homelessness, running away from home
(E)DUCATION/EMPLOYMENT, (E)ATING: School performance, attendance, sus- pensions; attitude toward school; favorite, most difficult, best subjects; special educational needs; goals for the future; after-school job or other work history; body image and dieting
(A)CTIVITIES: Friendships with same or opposite sex, ages of friends, best friend, dating, recreational activities, physical activity, sports participation, hobbies, and interests
(D)RUGS: Personal use of tobacco, alcohol, illicit drugs, anabolic steroids; peer substance use; family substance use and attitudes; if personal use, determine frequency, quantity, binge, injury with use; consider use of CRAFFT question- naire (Box 5.2)
(S)EXUALITY: Sexual orientation, gender identity, and relationship(s) should be explored with open-ended questions. If the adolescent is sexually active, discuss age of first sexual act, number of lifetime and current partners, ages of partners, knowledge of contraception and sexually transmitted infection/ human immunodeficiency virus (STI/HIV) prevention, reproductive life plan, prior testing for STI/HIV, prior pregnancies and/or abortions, and history of
nonconsensual intimate physical contact or sex. See Box EC 5.A for the "Five Ps" of the sexual history
(S)UICIDE/DEPRESSION: Feelings about self, both positive and negative; history of depression or other mental health problems; sleep problems (difficulty get- ting to sleep, early waking); changes in appetite or weight; anhedonia; irritabil- ity; anxiety; current or prior suicidal thoughts or attempts; other self-harming or injurious behavior; screen for depression using the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-2)
(S)AFETY: Feeling unsafe at home, at school, or in the community; bullying; guns in the home; weapon carrying, what kinds of weapons; fighting; arrests; gang membership; seatbelt use


From Gephart H: Rating scales, questionnaires, and behavior checklists. In ADHD Complex: Practicing Mental Health in Primary Care. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2019, pp 1-7.

Chapter 5 Adolescent Medicine	103

b. Brief Intervention: Stratify risk based on responses to screening questions.
(1) Low risk (abstinent): Reinforce decisions with praise and provide anticipatory guidance regarding riding in a car with a driver under the influence.
(2) Yes to "Car" question: Counsel and encourage safety plan.
(3) Moderate risk (CRAFFT negative): Advise cessation of substance use, educate regarding health risks of continued use, and praise personal attributes.
(4) High risk (CRAFFT =2): Conduct in-depth assessment using
motivational enhancement techniques, conduct brief negotiated
interview, or refer as appropriate.
c. Referral to Treatment: Further evaluation by a specialist in mental health/addiction can guide referral to an appropriate level of care.
4. Social media12: Explore how social media is used and for what quantity of time.
a. Benefits: Communication and engagement.
b. Risks of excessive/inappropriate use: Impaired sleep, attention, and learning; obesity; depression; viewing of unsuitable content; decrease in caregiver-child interactions; compromised privacy; meeting high-risk sexual partners or sexual predators, sexting, and cyberbullying.
(1) Guidance for teens and families: https://www.brightfutures.org/ development/adolescence/social-media.html
(2) AAP Family Media Use Plan: www.healthychildren.org/MediaUse Plan
5. Menstrual history: Age of menarche, last menstrual period (LMP), frequency/regularity and duration of menstrual cycle, reproductive life plan, condom use, and contraceptive use.
C. Physical Examination Elements Unique to the Adolescent13,14
1. Dentition and gums: Caries, enamel defects from tobacco use, and enamel erosion from induced vomiting.
2. Skin: Acne (see Chapter 8 for treatment guidelines), atypical nevi, acan- thosis nigricans, rashes, evidence of cutting, piercings, and tattoos.
3. Thyroid: Size, nodules.
4. Breasts: Sexual maturity rating for females, masses (most commonly fibrocystic changes and fibroadenomas in females, or gynecomastia in males), breast asymmetry (common occurrence in adolescence; more pronounced between Tanner pubertal stages 2 and 4).
a. Normal female breast development: See Fig. 5.1.
b. Physiologic gynecomastia in males:
(1) Epidemiology: Generally, occurs in middle to late stages of puberty (usually peaks in Tanner pubertal stage 3); occurs in 50% of boys (50% unilateral, 50% bilateral).
(2) Etiology: Breast growth stimulated by estradiol.
(3) Clinical course: Regression usually occurs over a 2-year period.


PSYCHOSOCIAL DEVELOPMENT OF ADOLESCENTS
Early AdolescenceMiddle AdolescenceLate AdolescenceTask(10-13 years)(14-16 years)(>17 years)IndependenceLess interest in parentalPeak of parentalReacceptance ofactivitiesconflictsparental adviceWide mood swingsand valuesBody imagePreoccupation with selfGeneral acceptanceAcceptance of puber-and pubertal changesof bodytal changesUncertainty aboutConcern over makingappearancebody more attractivePeersIntense relationships withPeak of peer involvementPeer group lesssame-sex friend(s)Conformity with peerimportantvaluesMore time spent inIncreased sexual activitysharing intimateand experimentationrelationshipsIdentityIncreased cognitionIncreased scope ofPractical, realisticIncreased fantasy worldfeelingsvocational goalsIncreasing sexualIncreased intellectualRefinement of moral,attractionsabilityreligious, andIdealistic vocationalFeeling of omnipotencesexual valuesgoalsRisk-taking behaviorAbility to compromiseIncreased need forEmerging sexual identityand to set limitsprivacySexual identityLack of impulse controlbecomes moresecureFrom Joffe A. Introduction to adolescent medicine. In: McMillan JA, DeAngelis CD, Feigan RD, et al., eds. Oski's Pediatrics Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams, & Wilkins; 2006.



 FIGURE 5.1 
Tanner stages of breast development in females. (Modified from Johnson TR, Moore WM. Children Are Different: Developmental Physiology. 2nd ed. Columbus, OH: Ross Laboratories; 1978. Mean age and range [2 standard deviations around mean] from Joffe A. Introduction to adolescent medicine. In: McMillan JA, DeAngelis CD, Feigin RD, et al., eds. Oski's Pediatrics: Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006:549-550.)

(4) Physical examination: Firm glandular tissue in a concentric mass beneath the areola/nipple is consistent with physiologic gyneco- mastia. A testicular examination should also be performed.
(5) Differential diagnosis: Nonphysiologic gynecomastia. Common causes include medication or substance use, primary or second- ary hypogonadism, cirrhosis, hyperthyroidism, tumors, and pseudogynecomastia (excess adipose tissue on exam).
(6) Red flags: Symptom duration over 2 years, nipple discharge, skin changes, breast masses, and coincident testicular abnormalities.
(7) Treatment: Often no treatment is necessary. Severe or non- regressing cases may warrant referral to pediatric surgeon, endo- crinologist, or oncologist, depending on suspected etiology.

Chapter 5 Adolescent Medicine	105
TANNER STAGES OF GENITAL DEVELOPMENT (MALE)
Tanner Stage	Comment (±2 Standard Deviations Around Mean Age)
2	Enlargement of scrotum and testesa; skin of scrotum reddens and changes in texture; little or no enlargement of penis; mean age 11.4 years (9.5-13.8 years)






aTesticular volume of greater than 4 mL or a long axis of greater than 2.5 cm is evidence that pubertal testicular growth has begun.
Data from Joffe A. Introduction to adolescent medicine. In: McMillan JA, DeAngelis CD, Feigin RD, et al, eds. Oski's Pediatrics: Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006:546-557.



TANNER STAGES OF PUBIC HAIR
Tanner Stage	Appearance

2	Sparse, downy hair at base of symphysis pubis
4	Adult hair quality, fills in pubic triangle, no spread to thighs

Data from Alario AJ, Birnkrant JD. Sexual maturation and tanner staging. Practical Guide to the Care of the Pediatric Patient. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 2007:798-800.


5. Genitalia: For both male and female genital examinations, a chaperone should be present, an explanation should occur before the examination, and findings should be discussed.
a. Male15:
(1) Normal male genital development: Table 5.1.
(2) Normal pubic hair development: Table 5.2.
(3) Assess for signs of STIs (rashes, warts, ulcers, erosions, discharge), inguinal hernias, masses, hydroceles, and varico- celes. If there are symptoms of proctitis with history of receptive anal intercourse (e.g., rectal pain, rectal bleeding, or tenesmus), a digital rectal examination should be performed.
b. Female16,17:
(1) Normal pubic hair development: see Table 5.2.
(2) External examination: Assess for signs of STIs (rashes, warts, ulcers, erosions, discharge), discharge suggestive of candidiasis or bacterial vaginosis, and evidence of trauma.


(3) Pelvic examination: Speculum exams are not routinely recom- mended for healthy asymptomatic women under 21 years of age. Indications for bimanual exam or speculum exam include: vaginal discharge with lower abdominal or pelvic pain (assess cervix for mucopurulent discharge, friability, large ectropion, foreign body, or cervical motion tenderness), menstrual disorders (amenorrhea, abnormal vaginal bleeding, or dysmenorrhea refractory to medical therapy), and Pap smear (see Section I.D.6).
(4) For suspected or reported sexual abuse or rape, refer to a specialized center if not appropriately trained and equipped to document evidence of trauma and collect forensic specimens.
Note: See Chapter 10 for information about precocious and delayed puberty.
D. Screening Laboratory Tests and Procedures
A lack of evidence has led to variability in guidelines for topics such as screening for dyslipidemia, iron-deficiency anemia, diabetes, and tubercu- losis. The recommendations that follow are largely based on the AAP, CDC,
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG).1,18-20
1. Immunizations: See Chapter 16.
2. Cholesterol screening: All children should undergo cholesterol screening once between ages 9 and 11 years and once between ages 17 and 21 years.
3. Diabetes screening: Consider screening for type 2 diabetes with hemo- globin A1c, fasting plasma glucose, or oral glucose tolerance test in children who have a BMI greater than 85% for age and sex with other risk factors such as family history.21
4. Consider selective screening for tuberculosis, anemia, and vision and hearing abnormalities if patient screens positive on risk screening questions.
5. STI screening: See Section II.
6. Papanicolaou (Pap) smear cervical cancer screening: Cytologic evalu- ation should be used. Human papilloma virus (HPV) testing is only recommended for routine screening above age 30. Recommended screening intervals and follow-up depend on age, medical history, and result of previous Pap smear, as presented in Table 5.3.

 II. SEXUAL HEALTH	
A. Sexually Transmitted Infection Screening Guidelines by Sexual Behavior18,22,23
1. All adolescents over age 13: The CDC recommends universal screening for HIV (via HIV 1/2 antigen/antibody test) at least once using an opt-out approach, or more frequently based on risk factors.







GUIDELINES FOR PAPANICOLAOU (PAP) SMEAR SCREENING AND FOLLOW-UP
Immune StatusRecommended Timing of Pap ScreeningRecommended Follow-Up Based on Pap ResultImmunocompetentAge 21NormalRepeat Papanicolaou (Pap) smear every3 years
Atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance (ASC-US)	Repeat Pap smear in 1 year Low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL)	Repeat Pap smear in 1 year
High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL)	Gynecology referral for colposcopy
Atypical squamous cells, cannot rule out HSIL (ASC-H)	Gynecology referral for colposcopyImmunosuppressed	Age 21	Normal	Repeat Pap smear every year Abnormal	Gynecology referral

HIV+	Within 1 year of HIV diagnosis, or if perinatally acquired, within 1 year of onset of sexual activity

Normal	Repeat Pap smear every year. If three
consecutive Pap smears are normal, space Pap interval to every 3 years.
Abnormal	Gynecology referral

Data from American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Committee on Practice Bulletins-Gynecology. Practice Bulletin No. 168: Cervical Cancer Screening and Prevention. Obstet Gynecol. 2016;128(4):e111-e130.


2. Heterosexual with one lifetime partner:
a. Male: Screen once with HIV 1/2 antigen/antibody test; gonorrhea and chlamydia urine nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) in high preva- lence clinical settings (e.g., adolescent clinics, correctional facilities, STI clinics). Repeat as indicated by sexual risk.
b. Female: Screen once with HIV 1/2 antigen/antibody test; self- or provider-collected vaginal NAAT for gonorrhea and chlamydia (rou- tine screening recommended in sexually active women under age
25). Repeat as indicated by sexual risk. Vaginal swab is the preferred method to screen for gonorrhea and chlamydia; self-collected speci- mens may have higher patient acceptability. Vaginal swabs are as sensitive and specific as cervical swabs, and both are more accurate than urine samples.24
3. Heterosexual with risk factors (new partner, multiple partners, partner with STI, intravenous drug use):
a. Male: Annual HIV 1/2 antigen/antibody test, rapid plasma reagin (RPR), and gonorrhea and chlamydia urine NAAT.
b. Female: Annual HIV 1/2 antigen/antibody test, RPR, and self- or provider-collected vaginal NAAT for gonorrhea, chlamydia, and trichomonas.
c. In adolescents with a history of an STI, repeat testing is recom- mended 3 months after treatment given high risk of reinfection.
4. Men who have sex with men (MSM): Annual HIV 1/2 antigen/antibody test, RPR, and gonorrhea and chlamydia NAAT (test sites of sexual contact: pharynx, urethra, and/or rectum) are recommended. For MSM with mul- tiple or anonymous partners, consider 3 to 6 month interval STI testing.
5. Women who have sex with women (WSW): Equivalent STI screening as heterosexual women, guided by sexual practices (e.g., gonorrhea and chla- mydia NAAT should be done at sites of sexual contact) and risk factors.
6. Pregnant women: At the first visit, pregnant patients should be screened with HIV 1/2 antigen/antibody test, RPR, vaginal gonorrhea and chla- mydia NAAT, and hepatitis B surface antigen test.
7. Transgender: Given the diversity of transgender persons regarding pat- terns of sexual behavior, hormone use, and surgery, clinicians should assess STI risk based on the patient's sexual behaviors and current anatomy (the latter of which should guide method of NAAT testing, if indicated).
8. Concern for recent exposure to STI:
a. Fourth generation HIV 1/2 antigen/antibody tests detect acute infec- tion within 10 to 14 days. If there is concern for acute or early HIV exposure, consider an HIV RNA nucleic acid test.25
b. Screen with RPR, gonorrhea and chlamydia NAAT (method of testing as described above by sexual behavior), and vaginal trichomonas NAAT for women.
c. Consider HSV PCR testing in individuals presenting for STI evaluation with genital lesion(s).

Chapter 5 Adolescent Medicine	109

9. Persons living with HIV: Screen at least annually with RPR, gonorrhea and chlamydia NAAT (method of testing as described above by sexual behavior), and vaginal trichomonas NAAT for women. Screen more frequently if indicated by sexual risk behaviors.
B. Sexually Transmitted Infection Evaluation and Management (Table 5.4)
1. HIV: See Chapter 17 for information on diagnosis and treatment of HIV, pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP), and postexposure prophylaxis (PEP). PrEP should be initiated in the primary care setting, when possible.
2. Syphilis18
a. Etiology: Treponema pallidum
b. Early syphilis (within 1 year of initial infection)
(1) Primary syphilis (chancre): Firm, usually painless sore(s) or ulcer(s) develop at the site of initial infection (genital, rectal, or oral). Chancres typically develop within 3 weeks of infec-
tion and heal 3 to 6 weeks after development in the absence of treatment.
(2) Secondary syphilis: Within weeks to months after a chancre appears, patients may develop body rash involving palms and soles, mucocutaneous lesions, lymphadenopathy, constitutional symptoms, and/or early neurosyphilis (e.g., meningitis or ocular syphilis).
(3) Early latent syphilis: Asymptomatic stage.
c. Late syphilis (over 1 year after initial infection)
(1) Late latent syphilis: Asymptomatic stage.
(2) Tertiary syphilis: Organ involvement may progress to cardio- vascular syphilis (e.g., aortitis), late neurosyphilis (e.g., tabes dorsalis or paresis), or gummatous syphilis.
d. Diagnosis: Testing algorithm varies by laboratory and typically includes a nontreponemal test (RPR or Venereal Disease Research Laboratory [VDRL] test) and a treponemal test (e.g., fluorescent treponemal antibody absorbed [FTA-ABS] test, enzyme immunoas- say) for confirmation.
e. Treatment: See Table 5.4. Clinical and serologic evaluation should be performed 6 and 12 months after treatment to ensure a fourfold reduction in nontreponemal titers or seroreversion. Monitor for Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction (fever, headache, and myalgias) within 24 hours of treatment.
f. Partner treatment: Partners with sexual contact within 90 days of a patient's diagnosis should be treated empirically. Partners with sexual contact over 90 days prior to diagnosis should be evalu- ated for treatment based on CDC 2015 STD Treatment Guidelines: http://www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/.
g. See Chapter 17 for information on neonatal syphilis and interpreta- tion of maternal and neonatal syphilis testing.







SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED AND GENITOURINARY INFECTIONS: GUIDELINES FOR MANAGEMENTa
InfectionClinical DiagnosisEmpiric TherapyaCommentsChlamydia InfectionsUncomplicated infection of the cervix, urethra, rectum, or pharynx
Chlamydia infection in pregnancy

Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV)Azithromycin 1 g PO once OR doxycycline 100 mg PO BID for 7 days
Alt: Erythromycin OR fluoroquinolone
Azithromycin 1 g PO once
Alt: Amoxicillin OR erythromycin
Doxycycline 100 mg PO BID for 21 daysConsider empirical treatment for gonor- rhea secondary to common coinfection
Test of cure 3 weeks posttreatment in all pregnant patientsAlt: ErythromycinGonorrhea InfectionsUncomplicated infection of the cervix, urethra, rectum, or pharynx
EpididymitisCeftriaxone 250 mg IM once PLUS azithromycin 1 g PO once
Alt for ceftriaxone: Cefixime OR gemifloxacin OR gentamicin
Ceftriaxone 250 mg IM once PLUS doxycycline 100 mg PO BID for 10 daysDual treatment is recommended for gonor- rhea secondary to organism resistance
For MSM, replace doxycycline with a
fluoroquinolone for 10 daysDisseminated gonococcal infectionsCeftriaxone 1 g IV/IM daily PLUS azithromycin 1 g PO once
Alt for ceftriaxone: CefotaximeCan switch to oral therapy 24-48 h after clinical improvement. Total course:
7 daysPelvic Inflammatory
Disease (PID)PID warranting outpatient treatmentCeftriaxone 250 mg IM once PLUS doxycycline 100 mg PO BID for 14 days ± metronidazole 500 mg PO BID for 14 daysPID warranting inpatient treatmentRegimen A for 14 days: (Cefotetan 2 g IV q12h OR cefoxitin 2 g IV q6h) PLUS doxycycline 100 mg IV or PO q12h
Regimen B for 14 days: Clindamycin 900 mg IV q8h PLUS gentami-
cin 2 mg/kg loading dose, then 1.5 mg/kg IV q8h maintenanceSwitch to oral therapy 24 h after clinical improvement to complete 14 days of treatment with doxycycline 100 mg PO
BID or clindamycin 450 mg PO QID,(or 3-5 mg/kg IV single daily dosing)respectively
Syphilis	Primary, secondary, or early latent syphilis (<1 year duration)


Late latent syphilis (>1 year dura- tion); tertiary syphilis

Benzathine penicillin G 50,000 U/kg (max 2.4 million units) IM (single dose)
Alt: Doxycycline OR tetracycline

Benzathine penicillin G 50,000 U/kg (max 2.4 million units) IM weekly for 3 weeks
Alt: Doxycycline OR tetracycline

Data is limited for penicillin alternatives. Pregnant women should be treated with penicillin G regimen appropriate for
stage of syphilis


Alt, Alternative; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; MSM, men who have sex with men; PO, per os.
aFor dosing for children aged =8 years or weighing less than 45 kg, or for dosing of alternative regimens, please refer to the CDC Treatment Guidelines, 2015: http://www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/. Partner notification and treatment is recommended for most sexually transmitted infections. Patients treated for a sexually transmitted infection should refrain from all sexual activity for 7 days posttreatment.

112	Part II Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information

3. Chlamydia and gonorrhea18
a. Etiology: Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae
b. Clinical manifestations: Urethritis, cervicitis, pharyngitis, proctitis, epididymitis, prostatitis. Other manifestations include:
(1) Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV): Lymphoproliferative reaction caused by C. trachomatis serovars L1 to L3 that most frequently presents as proctitis and lymphadenopathy in patients who are MSM or HIV positive.
(2) Disseminated gonococcal infection: Bacteremic spread of N. gonorrhoeae results in septic arthritis or arthritis-dermatitis syndrome (polyarthralgia, tenosynovitis, and dermatitis). In addi- tion to urogenital, rectal, and pharyngeal NAAT, workup should include blood, synovial, or CSF cultures, as applicable.
c. Diagnosis: Site-specific NAAT, including urogenital (urine NAAT in males, urine or vaginal NAAT in females [see Section II.A.2.b]), pharyngeal, and rectal.
d. Treatment: See Table 5.4.
e. Partner treatment: Partners should be treated. For partners for whom providers are concerned about access to prompt clinical evaluation and treatment, expedited partner therapy may be an option depend- ing on local and state laws.
4. Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID): Acute infection of the female upper genital tract.18
a. Etiology: Often polymicrobial in nature, however N. gonorrhoeae and
C. trachomatis are the most commonly identified pathogens, followed by Mycoplasma genitalium.
b. Differential diagnosis: Endometriosis, tubo-ovarian abscess (TOA), ovarian cyst, ectopic pregnancy, acute surgical abdomen, inflam- matory bowel disease (IBD), pyelonephritis, dysmenorrhea, septic/ threatened abortion
c. Workup: Pelvic and bimanual examination, gonorrhea/chlamydia and HIV testing, human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), wet preparation, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), and urinalysis/urine culture if clinically indicated. Consider a complete blood cell count (CBC) with differential and pelvic ultrasound if the patient is ill-appearing, has an adnexal mass on bimanual examina- tion, or is not improving after antibiotics.
d. Minimum diagnostic criteria: Uterine, adnexal, or cervical motion tenderness without other identifiable causes. One or more of the following additional criteria enhances specificity: fever (>38.3°C), mucopurulent vaginal or cervical discharge, leukocytes on saline microscopy, increased ESR or CRP, laboratory documentation of chlamydial or gonorrhea infection.
e. Treatment: See Table 5.4.
f. Admission criteria: Cannot exclude acute surgical abdomen, pres- ence of TOA, pregnancy, immunodeficiency, severe illness, inability

Chapter 5 Adolescent Medicine	113

to tolerate or follow outpatient oral regimen, failure to respond to appropriate outpatient therapy, or follow-up cannot be ensured.
5. Trichomoniasis18
a. Etiology: Trichomonas vaginalis
b. Diagnosis and treatment: See Table 5.5.
c. Follow-up: Women treated for trichomoniasis should be retested 3 months after treatment due to high rates of reinfection.
d. Partner treatment: Partners should be treated to prevent reinfection.
6. Mycoplasma genitalium18
a. Etiology: Mycoplasma genitalium
b. Clinical manifestations: Persistent urethritis, cervicitis, or PID despite appropriate treatment.
c. Diagnosis: No FDA-approved diagnostic test; NAAT is available in some large medical centers and commercial laboratories.
d. Treatment: Moxifloxacin has been used successfully; refer to latest CDC treatment guidelines.
7. Vaginal infections, genital ulcers, and warts
a. Diagnostic features of vaginal infections (see Table 5.5) can assist in differentiating normal vaginal discharge from bacterial vaginosis, trichomoniasis, and yeast vaginitis.
b. Diagnostic features of genital lesions, as well as management of warts and ulcers, are presented in Table 5.6.
C. Gender and Sexual Behavior
1. Terminology and definitions:
a. Sexual orientation26,27: Sexual orientation relates to sexual attraction, identity, and behavior. It is not related to gender identity. It should be defined by the individual patient.
b. Gender identity: An individual's self-awareness as male or female.
c. Gender expression: The way an individual expresses their gender (e.g., clothing and speech); may differ from gender identity.
d. Sex assigned at birth: Often based on phenotype (external genitals, gonads, and internal sex organs) and karyotype (XX, XY, XO, XXY, etc.); assigned at birth.
e. Transgender: An individual whose gender identity differs from the sex assigned at birth.
f. Cisgender: An individual whose gender identity is the same as the sex assigned at birth.
g. Gender nonbinary: Gender expression by an individual that does not match masculine and feminine gender norms.
h. Gender dysphoria28: Discomfort or distress caused by discrepancy between a person's gender identity and sex assigned at birth. DSM-V criteria recommends a diagnosis occur after 6 months of continuous incongruence. For prepubescent children, the desire to be of the other gender must be present and verbalized.
2. Special considerations in adolescents:
a. Adolescents may engage in a variety of sexual activities (penile-vaginal,



DIAGNOSTIC FEATURES AND MANAGEMENT OF VAGINAL INFECTIONS
No Infection/Physiologic Leukorrhea
Vulvovaginal Candidiasis
Trichomoniasis
Bacterial VaginosisaEtiology-Candida albicans and other yeastsTrichomonas vaginalisGardnerella vaginalis, anaerobic bacteria, mycoplasmaTypical symptomsNoneVulvar itching, irritation, ?Malodorous frothy discharge,Malodorous, ? dischargedischargevulvar itchingDischarge AmountVariable; usually scantScant to moderateProfuseModerateDischarge ColorClear or whiteWhiteYellow-greenUsually white or grayDischarge ConsistencyHeterogenousClumped; adherent plaquesHomogenousHomogenous, low viscosityVulvar/vaginal inflammationNoYesYesNopH of vaginal fluidbUsually <4.5Usually <4.5Usually >5.0Usually >4.5Amine ("fishy") odor with 10%NoneNoneMay be presentPresent, positive "whiff-amine" testpotassium hydroxide (KOH)MicroscopycNormal epithelial cells; Lactobacillus predominatesLeukocytes, epithelial cells, yeast, mycelia, or pseudomycelia in 40%-80% of casesLeukocytes; motile trichomo- nads seen in 50%-70% of symptomatic patients, less
often if asymptomaticClue cells, few leukocytes; Lactobacillus outnumbered by profuse mixed flora (nearly always including G. vaginalis plus
anaerobes)Usual treatmentNoneFluconazole 150 mg PO once OR
intravaginal azole creamMetronidazole 2 g PO once
OR tinidazole 2 g PO onceMetronidazole 500 mg PO BID for 7 days OR metronidazole gel 0.75% 5 g intravaginally daily for 5 days OR clindamycin cream 2% 5 g intravaginally daily for 7 daysNOTE: Refer to Formulary for dosing information.
aDespite more sensitive and specific laboratory tests, cost and practicality make the Amsel criteria the best in-office method to diagnose Bacterial Vaginosis. To diagnose BV, at least 3 criteria must be present: (1) Homogenous, thin, gray/white discharge; (2) Vaginal pH >4.5; (3) Positive whiff-amine test; (4) Clue cells on wet mount.
bpH determination is not useful if blood is present.
cTo detect fungal elements, vaginal fluid is mixed with 10% KOH before microscopic examination; to examine for other features, fluid is mixed with saline.
From Workowski KA, Bolan GA. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2015. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2015;64(RR3):1-137.



DIAGNOSTIC FEATURES AND MANAGEMENT OF GENITAL ULCERS AND WARTS
InfectionClinical PresentationPresumptive DiagnosisDefinitive DiagnosisTreatment/Management of Sex PartnersGenital herpesGrouped vesicles, painful shallowTzanck preparation withHSV PCRNo known cure. Prompt initiation of therapyulcers to mild clinical manifesta-multinucleated giantshortens duration of first episode. For severetion (redness, pain, excoriations);cellsrecurrent disease, initiate therapy at startHSV-2 more common cause ofof prodrome or within 1 day. Transmissiongenital lesionscan occur during asymptomatic periods. SeeFormulary for dosing of acyclovir, famciclovir,or valacyclovir.ChancroidEtiology: Haemophilus ducreyi
Painful genital ulcer; tender, sup-
purative inguinal adenopathyNo evidence of Treponema pallidum (syphilis) on
dark-field microscopyUse of special media (not widely available in United States);
sensitivity <80%Single dose: Azithromycin 1 g orally OR
ceftriaxone 250 mg IM. Partners should be
examined and treated, regardless of whetheror serologic testing;symptoms are present, or if they have had sexnegative HSVwithin 10 days preceding onset of patient'ssymptoms. Syphilis is a common co-pathogenwith chancroid.Primary syphilisIndurated, well-defined, usuallyNontreponemal serologicTreponemal serologic test: FTA-ABS,Parenteral penicillin G (see Table 5.4 for(chancre)single painless ulcer or chancre;test: VDRL, RPR, or STSdark-field microscopy or directpreparation[s], dosage, and length of treat-nontender inguinal adenopathyfluorescent antibody tests ofment). Treat presumptively for persons exposedlesion exudates or tissuewithin 3 months preceding the diagnosis ofprimary syphilis in a sex partner or who wereexposed >90 days preceding the diagnosis andin whom serologic tests may not be immedi-ately available or follow-up is uncertain.Continued





DIAGNOSTIC FEATURES AND MANAGEMENT OF GENITAL ULCERS AND WARTS
Infection	Clinical Presentation	Presumptive Diagnosis	Definitive Diagnosis	Treatment/Management of Sex Partners

HPV infection (genital warts)

Soft, fleshy, papillary or sessile, painless growth(s) around anus, vulvovaginal area, penis,
urethra, or perineum; no inguinal adenopathy

Typical clinical presentation

Papanicolaou smear revealing typical cytologic changes

Treatment does not eradicate infection. Goal: Removal of exophytic warts. Exclude cervical dysplasia before treatment.
1. Patient-administered therapies include:
Podofilox gel or imiquimod cream
2. Clinician-applied therapies include: Bichloroacetic or trichloroacetic acid, surgical removal, or cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen or cryoprobe.
Podofilox, imiquimod, and podophyllin are contra- indicated in pregnancy. Period of communicability unknown.


NOTE: Chancroid, lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV), and granuloma inguinale should be considered in the differential diagnosis of genital ulcers if the clinical presentation is atypical and tests for herpes and syphilis are negative.
EIA, Enzyme immunoassay; FTA-ABS, fluorescent treponemal antibody absorbed; HPV, human papillomavirus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; IM, intramuscular; RPR, rapid plasma reagin; STS, serologic test for syphilis;
TP-PA, T. pallidum passive particle agglutination assay; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory.
Modified from Workowski KA, Bolan GA. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2015. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2015;64(RR3):1-137.


heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual). Conversely, adolescents may self- identify with a particular sexual orientation but not be sexually active.
b. Sexual identity emerges during adolescence. It is important to pro- vide a safe environment for adolescents to discuss questions about their sexual identity and behavior, and ask questions about sexual activities regardless of sexual orientation.
3. Medical interventions for gender-dysphoric or transgender patients29-31:
a. Prepubertal children: Parental support and education to create a safe environment for the child. Familial support of social transition for transgender children has been associated with better mental health outcomes.
b. Pubertal suppression (reversible): GnRH analogue (e.g., Lupron and Supprelin) can be used to suppress endogenous hormones after onset of puberty.
c. Gender-affirming hormone therapy (partially irreversible): Estradiol or testosterone therapy with gradual dose escalation initiated after a multi- disciplinary team of medical and mental health providers has confirmed the persistence of gender dysphoria/gender incongruence and sufficient mental capacity to give informed consent (generally by the age of 16 years). Treatment can be considered as early as age 13.5 to 14 years.
d. Gender-affirming surgery (including gonadectomy, hysterectomy, mas- tectomy, and genital surgery): Not recommended until age of majority.
D. Contraception32,33
1. Special considerations in adolescents:
a. Over 40% of adolescents in the United States have had sexual inter- course and over 75% of adolescent pregnancies are unplanned.34,35
b. Barriers may include confidentiality concerns (e.g., fear of parental dis- closure), fear of pelvic examination, and fear of medication side effects.
c. Long-acting reversible contraception (LARC) methods have well- established safety and efficacy and are first-line contraceptive methods according to the ACOG and the AAP. Adherence and continuation rates of LARC methods in adolescents are superior to short-acting contraceptives. To avoid a delay in initiation, quick start method should be considered for most adolescents.36
d. Providers should pay special attention to informed consent, confi- dentiality, parental involvement, insurance coverage, and cost. If an adolescent does not have or does not want to use their insurance coverage, refer to a clinic with Title X or other public funding (http:// www.hhs.gov/opa/).
e. Counseling should include discussion of need for barrier method to prevent STIs.
2. Method comparison (Fig. 5.2)37:
3. Contraception selection and initiation:
a. Selecting a contraceptive method: Refer to the CDC Medical Eligibility Criteria (http://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/unintendedpregnan cy/usmec.htm) for relative and absolute contraindications for each



 Most Effective

Reversible
Implant	Intrauterine Device
(IUD)

How to make your method most effective





 Less than 1 pregnancy
per 100






0.05%






Permanent





LNG - 0.2%
Copper T - 0.8%


After procedure, little or nothing to do or remember.

 women in a year

Male Sterilization
(Vasectomy)

Female Sterilization
(Abdominal, Laparoscopic, Hysteroscopic)

Vasectomy and hysteroscopic sterilization: Use another method for first 3 months.


0.15%	0.5%





6-12
pregnancies per 100 women
in a year

Injectable


6%








Ring


9%

Pill




9%








Diaphragm


12%

Patch




9%

Injectable: Get repeat injections on time.

Pills: Take a pill each day.

Patch, Ring: Keep in place, change on time.

Diaphragm: Use correctly every time you have sex.






18 or more pregnancies per 100 women
in a year


Least

Male Condom

18%
Sponge



24% parous women

Female Condom

21%
Fertility-Awareness Based Methods

Withdrawal





22%
Spermicide

Condoms, sponge, withdrawal, spermicides: Use correctly every time you have sex.

Fertility awareness
-based methods: Abstain or use condoms on fertile days. Newest methods (Standard Days Method and TwoDay Method) may be the easiest to use and

Effective 12% nulliparous women

24%

28%

consequently more effective.


 CONDOMS SHOULD ALWAYS BE USED TO REDUCE THE RISK OF SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
Other Methods of Contraception
Lactational Amenorrhea Method: LAM is a highly effective, temporary method of contraception.
Emergency Contraception: Emergency contraceptive pills or a copper IUD after unprotected intercourse substantially reduces risk of pregnancy.


 FIGURE 5.2-CONT'D 
Comparing effectiveness of family planning methods. The percentages indicate the failure rate of each contraceptive method, or the number of women who experienced an unintended pregnancy within the first year of typical use. (From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. U.S. Selected Practice Recommendations for Contraceptive Use, 2016. MMWR. 2016;65[4];1-66. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/vol- umes/65/rr/rr6504a1.htm.)

hormonal contraceptive method and the CDC's Selected Practice Recommendations (http://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/unintend edPregnancy/USSPR.htm) for minimum requirements to start each method.
(1) To start a hormonal method, the basic medical history should include assessment of clotting risk, blood pressure, pregnancy status, and any other pertinent medical comorbidities.
(2) Combined hormonal contraception is associated with a small increase in risk for thrombosis including deep vein thrombosis, myocardial infarction, and stroke.38 The risk is higher in women who smoke more than 15 cigarettes a day, women over 35 years old, and women with other risk factors for cardiovascular disease.
(3) To support adherence and continuation, use a patient-centered approach, review method effectiveness, and provide anticipatory guidance regarding side effects of each method when assisting an adolescent in selecting a new contraceptive method.
b. Quick start (Fig. 5.3): Starting a method of contraception on the day of the visit (not waiting until a new menstrual cycle begins) should be considered for most adolescents. Can be used for all methods, including LARC, if there is reasonable certainty that the patient is not pregnant (Box 5.3). A urine pregnancy test should be performed when using this approach.39
4. Specific contraceptive methods:
Note: Contraceptive methods are described in order of effectiveness.
a. Intrauterine device (IUD)36: LARC inserted into the uterus. Safe to use among adolescents, may be inserted without difficulty in most ado- lescents and nulliparous women; expulsion is uncommon. Among the most effective forms of birth control. Does not increase risk of infertility; baseline fertility returns rapidly after removal. Increased risk of pelvic infection with placement, but the absolute risk of infec- tion is low and exists only within the first 3 weeks after placement. Screening is recommended for gonorrhea and chlamydia at the time of insertion based on the CDC guidelines as age (<25 years old) is a risk factor for STIs. Insertion should not be delayed for test results; treatment can occur without IUD removal.
(1) Copper (Paragard): Hormone-free, FDA approved for 10 years of use although data supports potential efficacy for an additional 1 to 2 years.36,40





Yes	No

Yes	No

Yes	No


No	Yes












 FIGURE 5.3 
Algorithm for quick start initiation of contraception. EC, emergency contraception;
hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin.
aPregnancy tests may take 2 to 3 weeks after sex to be accurate.
bConsider pregnancy test at second depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA [Depo- Provera]) injection if quick start regimen was used and patient failed 4-week follow- up visit. (Modified from Zieman M, Hatcher RA, Cwiak C, et al. A Pocket Guide to












Adapted from Curtis KM, Jatlaoui TC, Tepper NK, et al. U.S. selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2016;65(4):1-66.

(2) Progestin-containing (Levonorgestrel): There are four types with differing amounts of progestin. Mirena is FDA approved for 5 years; data supports an additional 2 years.36,41 Kyleena is FDA approved for 5 years. Liletta is FDA approved for 4 years; data supports an additional year.36,42 Skyla is FDA approved for 3 years.
(3) Changes in bleeding patterns are common in first months of use.
Copper IUD may cause heavier menses. Many women using the levonorgestrel IUD will have a decrease in bleeding over time. First-line treatment for bleeding and spotting is NSAIDs.43 Bleeding concerns that are not associated with device insertion should be evaluated for other etiologies.
b. Subdermal implant: Progestin-only LARC, 4-cm rod inserted into the upper arm. Newer model (Nexplanon) is radio-opaque. FDA approved for 3 years; studies show efficacy for up to 5 years.41 Minimal or no effect on bone density or body weight; causes a
change in bleeding patterns. Return to fertility is rapid after removal. May be less effective for women who are overweight or obese.
Among the most effective forms of birth control.
(1) Removal requires a small incision and takes an average of 1 minute.
(2) Persistent irregular bleeding is the most common complaint resulting in implant removal, but continuation rates among adolescents remain high.44 As opposed to levonorgestrel IUD, bleeding changes persist throughout duration of use. The bleeding pattern in the first 3 months of use is predictive of future bleeding. Important to provide preinsertion anticipatory guidance. Consider postinsertion management of bleeding with NSAIDs, combined OCPs, or doxycycline.37,45
c. Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA [Depo-Provera]) injection:
Progestin-only injection into arm every 13 to 15 weeks. Typical failure


rate: 6%. Delayed return to fertility (9 to 18 months). Menstrual irregularity is common, but often resolves after several cycles. May cause weight gain, but not a uniform finding in studies.
(1) Patient should be encouraged to receive adequate calcium and vitamin D due to association with decrease in bone mineral density.
(2) FDA black box warning: Should not be used for longer than 2 consecutive years unless other forms of birth control are
inadequate due to bone mineral density concerns. Bone density returns after discontinuation. The risk of loss of bone mineral density should be weighed against the need for effective contra- ception in the context of each adolescent.39
d. Combined hormonal oral contraceptive pills (OCPs): Combination of estrogen and progestin taken daily. "Low-dose" (35 mCg or less of ethinyl estradiol) pills are the recommended dosing for adoles- cents. Back-up method needed for at least 7 days after initiation.
Typical failure rates are approximately 9% and may be higher in teens. Known to improve dysmenorrhea and are first-line therapy for endometriosis. Newer formulations exist, known as extended-cycle regimens, which reduce the number of menstrual cycles per year.
(1) The first pill should be taken either on the day of the visit (quick start) or between the first and seventh day after the start of the menstrual period (most commonly Sunday).
(2) Some pill packs have 28 pills, others have 21 pills. When the 28-day pack is empty, immediately start taking pills from a new pack. When the 21-day pack is empty, wait 1 week (7 days), then begin taking pills from a new pack.
(3) If a pill is missed, it should be taken as soon as remembered, even if it means taking two pills in 1 day. If two or more pills missed, two pills should be taken daily until back on schedule and a backup method should be used for 7 days.
e. Progestin-only pills: Can be used for those with contraindications to estrogen-containing formulations. Require daily use and are more sensitive to timing (should be taken at same time each day); have no pill-free interval. Considered less effective than combined hormonal methods. Irregular bleeding is a common adverse effect.
f. Transdermal (patch) contraceptive: Contains estrogen and progestin, measures 1.75 × 1.75 in. Place on abdomen, upper torso, upper outer arm, or buttocks. Use one patch for 3 weeks, then remove for 1 week for withdrawal bleed. Greater exposure to estrogen than with other methods; may have more estrogen-related side effects. There may be a greater risk for thromboembolism compared to OCPs, though the data is not clear.46 May be less effective in women who weigh more than 90 kg.
g. Vaginal ring: Flexible latex-free ring that contains estrogen and progestin. Placed in vagina for 3 weeks, removed for 1 week for


withdrawal bleeding. May be used continuously (avoiding week of menses) by replacing with a new ring every 4 weeks (or the same day every month) to help reduce pelvic pain and dysmenorrhea. May be removed for up to 3 hours (not recommended in adolescents).
Requires user comfort with insertion and removal. Screen for comfort with this method by asking if the adolescent is comfortable using tampons. Typical use failure rate similar to other combined hormonal methods (9%).
h. Barrier methods: Require placement prior to sexual intercourse. Include cervical sponge, cervical cap, cervical shield, diaphragm (these methods are used in conjunction with spermicide), as well as female and male condoms. Male condom is most commonly used birth control among adolescents with a failure rate of 18% with typi- cal use.37 Use latex condoms only with water-based lubricants; oil- based lubricants are not recommended. While barrier methods are less effective than other methods of contraception, their use should still be emphasized for prevention of STIs.
i. Fertility awareness-based methods of pregnancy prevention: Involves following a woman's menstrual cycle to help prevent pregnancy.
5. Emergency contraception (EC)47: Used to prevent pregnancy following unprotected sex (including sexual assault) or a recent possible failure of another method of contraception.
a. Mechanism: Hormonal methods work by delaying ovulation. Copper IUD inhibits fertilization by affecting sperm viability and function. All methods are only effective before implantation takes place and will not disrupt an implanted pregnancy.
b. Efficacy48: Copper IUD is the most effective method, but requires a clinic visit for insertion. Ulipristal is the next most effective, but
requires a prescription. Levonorgestrel is the next most effective and is available over the counter. The Yuzpe regimen is the least effective and has the most side effects.
c. Timing: Hormonal methods are most effective when given as soon as possible. Efficacy declines linearly with time but there is efficacy up to 120 hours after intercourse. Ulipristal and copper IUD maintain high efficacy when taken up to 120 hours after intercourse.
d. Pregnancy should be excluded based on history, physical exam, or pregnancy testing before prescribing ulipristal or placing an IUD, as they may adversely affect an established pregnancy.
e. Methods:
(1) Progestin only: Levonorgestrel. Take 1.5 mg orally once (may be packaged as 1.5 mg tablet or two 0.75 mg tablets).
(2) Antiprogestins: Ulipristal ("Ella"). Take 30 mg orally once. Mifepristone is an alternative agent used in some countries as EC, but is not available in the U.S. for this purpose.
(3) Ethinyl estradiol plus levonorgestrel (Yuzpe regimen): Patients take multiple OCPs from packets designed for 28-day use. Take


equivalent of 100 mCg of ethinyl estradiol plus 500 mCg of levonorgestrel. Twelve hours later, take the same dose. For more precise instructions for a particular combination pill, refer to https:// ec.princeton.edu.
(4) Copper IUD may be inserted within 120 hours of coitus.
f. Guidelines:
(1) Counseling about EC should be a routine part of anticipatory guidance for all female and male adolescents. Advance prescrip- tions should be considered for all adolescents.
(2) Antiemetics can be used to prevent nausea and should be used prophylactically in the Yuzpe regimen.
(3) May be combined with other ongoing methods of birth control.
(4) OCPs may be started immediately after progestin-only or com- bined hormonal EC dosing has been completed. DMPA may be given the same day.
(5) Patient should abstain from sexual intercourse or use barrier contraception for 7 days (14 if using ulipristal) or until next men- ses, whichever comes first.
(6) Scheduled follow-up is not required after use of EC. However, women whose menses are delayed by a week or more, or have any signs of pregnancy (e.g., irregular menses, abdominal cramp- ing), should be evaluated clinically or have a pregnancy test.
6. Follow-up recommendations for contraception: Two or three visits per year to monitor compliance, blood pressure, side effects, and satisfac- tion with chosen birth control option.
E. Pregnancy49,50
If pregnancy is suspected in an adolescent patient, take a sexual history and explore how the patient feels about a possible pregnancy in order to guide the rest of the visit.
1. Diagnosis:
a. Perform urine hCG testing to diagnose the pregnancy. False-positives and false-negatives are possible; repeat urine testing or serum hCG testing may be indicated.
b. If pregnancy is diagnosed, estimate the gestational age using the LMP. Confirm with a brief exam of uterine size. When in doubt, arrange an ultrasound and obstetric consultation promptly, as gesta- tional age will affect counseling options.
c. Share the diagnosis with the patient privately. Encourage them to involve a parent or legal guardian and facilitate the discussion, if nec- essary. Be familiar with local confidentiality laws, which vary by state.
d. Review the patient's medications to ensure they are safe for preg- nancy. Start patient on prenatal vitamin if not taking.
2. Prenatal testing: All pregnant adolescents should be tested for HIV, syphilis, hepatitis B, chlamydia, and gonorrhea at the first prenatal visit. If an infection is suspected or if there may be a delay in obstetric care, the pediatrician should perform the testing.


3. Options counseling: Counsel the adolescent on the importance of mak- ing a timely decision. The options depend on gestational age, but may include continuing the pregnancy and raising the infant, continuing the pregnancy and making an adoption plan, or terminating the pregnancy. If a pediatrician has personal limitations in offering a discussion of all three options, he/she should make a prompt referral to a colleague or consultant. Medical and surgical abortion may be available depending on the gestational age of the pregnancy and coexisting medical conditions. Medical abortion is generally available under 9 weeks of gestation; surgi- cal abortion is generally available under 20 to 24 weeks of gestation.
4. Complications: First trimester complications include ectopic preg- nancy and spontaneous abortion; immediate obstetric referral may be indicated for abdominal pain and/or vaginal bleeding in the pregnant patient.

All adolescents, particularly those with special healthcare needs or chronic conditions, benefit from careful attention to the process of transitioning to adult care. Transition planning should routinely occur during well-visits and should start at age 12. Resources for how to approach and organize the transition process including guidance on transition readiness and planning are available at http://www.gottransition.org/. See Chapter 9 for discussion of transition to adult care for youth with developmental disorders and disabilities.

A. Websites for Clinicians
• Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on contraception: http://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/unintendedpregnancy/contrace  ption.htm
• CDC on sexually transmitted infections (STI): https://www.cdc.gov/std/life-stages-populations/adolescents- youngadults.htm
• Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine:
http://www.adolescenthealth.org
B. Websites for Patients
• Drug abuse: http://www.teens.drugabuse.gov
• Sexual health: http://www.plannedparenthood.org/, http://www.bedsider.org
• CDC resources for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, & Transgender (LGBT) youth:
https://www.cdc.gov/lgbthealth/youth-resources.htm

A complete list of references can be found online at www.expertconsult.com.

BOX EC 5.A
OBTAINING THE SEXUAL HISTORY: THE FIVE PS
1. Partners
• "Do you have sex with men, women, or both?"
• "In the past 2 months, how many partners have you had sex with?"
• "In the past 12 months, how many partners have you had sex with?"
• "Is it possible that any of your sex partners in the past 12 months had sex with someone else while they were still in a sexual relationship with you?"
2. Prevention of Pregnancy
• "What are you doing to prevent pregnancy?"
3. Protection from STIs
• "What do you do to protect yourself from STIs including HIV?"
4. Practices
• "To understand your risk for STIs, I need to understand the kind of sex you have had recently."
• "Have you had vaginal sex, meaning 'penis in vagina sex'?" If yes, "Do you use condoms: never, sometimes, or always?"
• "Have you had anal sex, meaning "penis in rectum/anus sex"?" If yes, "Do you use condoms: never, sometimes, or always?"
• "Have you had oral sex, meaning 'mouth on penis/vagina sex'?"
• "Have you had vaginal or anal sex using fingers or sex toys?" For condom answers:
• If "never": "Why don't you use condoms?"
• If "sometimes": "In what situations, or with whom, do you not use condoms?"
5. Past History of STIs
• "Have you ever had an STI?"
• "Have any of your partners had an STI?"
Additional questions to identify HIV and viral hepatitis risk include:
• "Have you or any of your partners ever injected drugs?"
• "Have any of your partners exchanged money or drugs for sex?"
• "Is there anything else about your sexual practices I need to know about?"

HIV, Human immunodeficiency virus; STI, sexually transmitted infection.
Modified from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Sexually Transmitted Diseases Treatment Guidelines 2015, Clinical Prevention Guidance. Available at https://www. cdc.gov/std/tg2015/clinical.htm.


 REFERENCES	
1. American Academy of Pediatrics. Recommendations for Preventive Pediatric Health Care. Bright Futures/American Academy of Pediatrics. 2017. https://www.aap.org/en-us/Documents/periodicity_schedule.pdf. Accessed February 3, 2019.
2. Pasternak RH, Geller G, Parrish C, et al. Adolescent and parent perceptions on youth participation in risk behavior research. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2006;160(11):1159-1166.
3. Sedlander E, Brindis CD, Bausch SH, et al. Options for assuring access to confidential care for adolescents and young adults in an explanation of benefits environment. J Adolesc Health. 2015;56(1):7-9.
4. Tebb KP, Sedlander E, Pica G, et al. Protecting Adolescent Confidentiality Under Health Care Reform: The Special Case Regarding Explanations of Benefits (EOBs). San Francisco: Philip R. Lee Institute of Health Policy and Division of
Adolescent and Young Adult Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco; 2014.
5. Guttmacher Institute. An Overview of Minors' Consent Law; 2018. https://www.guttmacher.org/state-policy/explore/overview-minors-consent-law. Accessed February 3, 2019.
6. Rape Abuse, Incest National Network. Public Policy & Action; 2018. https://rainn.org/public-policy-action. Accessed February 3, 2019.
7. Sanders RA. Adolescent psychosocial, social, and cognitive development. Pediatr Rev. 2013;34(8):354-359.
8. Goldenring JM, Rosen DS. Getting into adolescent heads: an essential update.
Contemp Pediatr. 2004;21(1):64-90.
9. Nackers KA, Kokotailo P, Levy SJ. Substance abuse, general principles. Pediatr Rev. 2015;36:535.
10. Knight JR, Sherritt L, Shrier LA, Harris SK, Chang G. Validity of the CRAFFT substance abuse screening test among adolescent clinic patients. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2002;156:607-614.
11. Committee on Substance Abuse, Levy SJ, Kokotailo PK. Substance use screen- ing, brief intervention, and referral to treatment for pediatricians. Pediatrics. 2011;128(5):e1330-e1340.
12. Reid Chassiakos YL, Radesky J, Christakis D, Moreno MA, Cross C. Council on Communications and Media. Children and adolescents and digital media. Pediatrics. 2016;138(5):e20162593.
13. Joffe A. Introduction to adolescent medicine. In: McMillan JA, DeAngelis CD, Feigan RD, et al., eds. Oski's Pediatrics: Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006:546-557.
14. Neinstein LS, et al. Adolescent Health Care: A Practical Guide. Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2007.
15. Marcell AV, et al. Male adolescent sexual and reproductive health care.
Pediatrics. 2011;128(6):e1658-e1676.
16. Kaskowitz A, Quint E. A practical overview of managing adolescent gynecologic conditions in the pediatric office. Pediatr Rev. 2014;35(9):371-381.
17. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Well-woman visit. com- mittee opinion No. 534. Obstet Gynecol. 2014;120:421-424.
18. Workowski KA, Bolan GA, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2015. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2015;64(RR3):1-137.

References	125.e3

19. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Recommendations for Primary Care Practice; 2017. https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/recommendati
ons. Accessed February 3, 2019.
20. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Committee on practice bulletins-gynecology. Practice Bulletin No. 168: cervical cancer screening and prevention. Obstet Gynecol. 2016;128(4):e111-e130.
21. American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in diabetes-2016.
Diabetes Care. 2016;39(suppl 1):S1-S106.
22. Moyer VA, US Preventive services task force. Screening for HIV: U.S. preventive services task force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:51-60.
23. Emmanuel PJ, Martinez J, Committee on Pediatric AIDS. American academy of pediatrics. adolescents and HIV infection: the pediatrician's role in promoting routine testing. Pediatrics. 2011;128(5):1023-1029.
24. Papp JR, Schachter J, Gaydos C, Van Der Pol B. Recommendations for the laboratory-based detection of Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonor- rhoeae-2014. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2014;63 (No. RR-02).
25. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2018 Quick reference guide: Recommended laboratory HIV testing algorithm for serum or plasma speci- mens. https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/50872. Accessed February 26, 2019.
26. Frankowski BL. Committee on adolescence. sexual orientation and adolescents.
Pediatrics. 2004;113(6):1827-1832.
27. Tulloch T, Kaufman M. Adolescent sexuality. Pediatr Rev. 2015;34(1):29-37.
28. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2013.
29. Olson-Kennedy J, Rosenthal SM, Hastings J, Wesp L, University of California- San Francisco. Health Considerations for Gender Non-Conforming Children and Transgender Adolescents; 2016. https://transcare.ucsf.edu/guidelines/youth. Accessed February 27, 2019.
30. Olsen KR, Durwood L, DeMueles M, McLaughlin KA. Mental health of transgender children who are supported in their identities. Pediatrics. 2016;137(3):e20153223.
31. Hembree WC, Cohen-Kettenis PT, Gooren L, et al. Endocrine treatment of gender-dysphoric/gender-incongruent persons: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2017;102(11):2869-3903.
32. Upadhya KK. Contraception for adolescents. Pediatr Rev. 2013;34(9):384-394.
33. Zurawin RK, Ayensu-Coker L. Innovations in contraception: a review. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2007;50(2):425-439.
34. Kann L, McManus T, Harris WA, et al. Youth risk behavior surveillance- United States, 2017. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2018;67(No. SS-8):1-114.
35. Finer LB, Zolna MR. Unintended pregnancy in the United States: incidence and disparities, 2006. Contraception. 2011;84(5):478-485.
36. Committee on Adolescent Health Care Long-Acting Reversible Contraception Working Group, The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Adolescents and long-acting reversible contraception: implants and intrauterine devices. Committee opinion no. 735. Obstet Gynecol. 2018;131:e130-e139.
37. Curtis KM, Jatlaoui TC, Tepper NK, et al. U.S. selected practice recommenda- tions for contraceptive Use, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2016;65(4):1-66.
38. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Contraceptive Guidance for Healthcare Providers. US Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use, Combined Hormonal Contraceptives; 2016. https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehe alth/contraception/mmwr/mec/appendixd.html. Accessed February 26, 2019.


39. Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate and bone effects. Committee opinion No. 602. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol. 2014;123:1398-1402.
40. Wu JP, Pickle S. Extended use of the intrauterine device: a literature review and recommendations for clinical practice. Contraception. 2014;89:495-503.
41. McNicholas C, Swor E, Wan L, Peipert JF. Prolonged use of the etonogestrel implant and levonorgestrel intrauterine device: 2 years beyond Food and Drug Administration-approved duration. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2017;216:586.e1-e6.
42. Creinin MD, Jansen R, Starr RM, et al. Lovenorgestrel release rates over 5 years with the Liletta(r) 52-mg intrauterine system. Contraception. 2016;94:353-356.
43. Godfrey EM, et al. Treatment of bleeding irregularities in women with copper- containing IUDs: a systematic review. Contraception. 2013;87:549-566.
44. Diedrich JT, Klein DA, Peipert JF. Long-acting reversible contraception in adolescents: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2017;216(4):364.e1-364.e12.
45. Weisberg E, Hickey M, Palmer D, et al. A pilot study to assess the effect of three short-term treatments on frequent and/or prolonged bleeding compared to placebo in women using Implanon. Hum Reprod. 2006;21:295.
46. Tepper NK, et al. Nonoral combined hormonal contraceptives and thromboem- bolism: a systematic review. Contraception. 2017;95(2):130-139.
47. Committee on Adolescence. Emergency contraception. Pediatrics. 2012;130(6):1174-1182.
48. Glasier A. Emergency contraception: clinical outcomes. Contraception. 2013:309-313.
49. Trussell J. Contraceptive failure in the United States. Contraception. 2011;83:397.
50. Hornberger LL, AAP Committee on Adolescence. Diagnosis of pregnancy and providing counseling options for the adolescent patient. Pediatrics. 2017;140(3):e2017227.
51. American Academy of Pediatrics. Clinical Report-Supporting the health care transition from adolescence to adulthood in the medical home. Pediatrics. 2011;128(1):182-200.

Chapter 6
Analgesia and Procedural
Sedation
Courtney Altshuler, MD and Kelsey Gladen, MD

 See additional content on Expert Consult

 I. PAIN ASSESSMENT	
A. Infant1
1. Physiologic response
a. Characterized by oxygen desaturation, crying, diaphoresis, flushing or pallor, and increases in blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory rate.
b. Seen primarily in acute pain; subsides with continuing/chronic pain.
2. Behavioral response
a. Observe characteristics and duration of cry, facial expressions, visual tracking, body movements, and response to stimuli.
b. Neonatal Infant Pain Scale (NIPS): Behavioral assessment tool for the preterm neonate and full-term neonate up to 6 weeks after birth.
c. FLACC scale (Table 6.1): Measures and evaluates pain interven- tions by quantifying pain behaviors, including Facial expression, Leg movement, Activity, Cry, and Consolability, with scores ranging from 0 to 10.2 The Revised FLACC scale is reliable in children with cognitive impairment.3
B. Preschooler
In addition to physiologic and behavioral responses, the FACES pain scale revised (FPS-R) can be used to assess pain intensity in children as young as 3 years of age by having the patient point to the image on the scale that best characterizes their pain (Fig. 6.1).
C. School-Age and Adolescent
Evaluate physiologic and behavioral responses; ask about description, loca- tion, and character of pain. Starting at the age of 7 years, children can use the standard subjective pain rating scale, in which 0 is no pain and 10 is the worst pain ever experienced.

 II. ANALGESICS1	
A. Safety
1. Combined Analgesics
a. Danger of acetaminophen toxicity when using combined opioid- acetaminophen products (oxycodone or hydrocodone with acetaminophen).
126

Chapter 6  Analgesia and Procedural Sedation	127


FLACC PAIN ASSESSMENT TOOL
FACE
0-No particular expression or smile
1-Occasional grimace or frown, withdrawn, disinterested 2-Frequent to constant frown, quivering chin, clenched jaw LEGS
0-Normal position or relaxed 1-Uneasy, restless, tense 2-Kicking or legs drawn up ACTIVITY
0-Lying quietly, normal position, moves easily 1-Squirming, shifting back and forth, tense 2-Arched, rigid, or jerking
CRY
0-No cry (awake or asleep)
1-Moans or whimpers, occasional complaint
2-Crying steadily, screams or sobs, frequent complaints
CONSOLABILITY
0-Content, relaxed
1-Reassured by occasional touching, hugging, or being talked to; distractible 2-Difficult to console or comfort
Modified from Manworren R, Hynan L. Clinical validation of FLACC: preverbal patient pain scale. Pediatr Nurs. 2003;29:140-146.

 FIGURE 6.1 
Wong-Baker FACES Pain Rating Scale (From wongbakerfaces.org: Wong-Baker FACES Foundation [2016]. Wong-Baker FACES(r) Pain Rating Scale. Retrieved with permis- sion from http://www.WongBakerFACES.org. Originally published in Whaley & Wong's Nursing Care of Infants and Children. (c) Elsevier Inc.)

b. Preferable to prescribe opioids and acetaminophen separately.
2. Codeine
a. Not recommended for use in children.
b. Five percent of the population show ultra-rapid metabolism of codeine to morphine (the active metabolite), which can lead to dan- gerously high levels. This is especially unsafe after tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy (T&A) performed for sleep apnea.4


c. Little to no analgesic effect in newborns and approximately 10% of the U.S. population.5
3. Meperidine
a. Not recommended for use in children due to risk of neurotoxicity (agitation, tremors, myoclonus, and seizures), especially when renal dysfunction is present.6
b. Contraindicated in patients receiving monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors.
4. Tramadol
a. Opioid pain reliever, with additional effects on nonopioid receptors.
b. May be over-metabolized to an active opiate metabolite, resulting in potentially fatal respiratory depression.
c. In 2017, the FDA issued its strongest warning against use in chil- dren; therefore, administration is considered off-label.7
B. Nonopioid Analgesics
Weak analgesics with antipyretic activity are commonly used to manage mild to moderate pain of nonvisceral origin. Can be administered alone or in combination with opioids.
1. Acetaminophen [by mouth (PO)/per rectum (PR)/intravenous (IV)]: Weak analgesic with no antiinflammatory activity, platelet inhibition, or gastro- intestinal (GI) irritation. Hepatotoxicity can occur with high doses.
2. Aspirin (PO/PR): Associated with platelet inhibition and GI irritation.
Avoid for analgesia in pediatrics due to risk of Reye syndrome.
3. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): Ibuprofen (PO/IV), ketorolac [IV/intramuscular (IM)/PO/intranasal (IN)], naproxen (PO), diclofenac (PO/IV), and celecoxib (PO).
a. Use with extreme caution in children less than 6 months of age due to concern for adverse GI effects and risk of renal failure.
b. Especially useful for sickle cell disease, bony, rheumatic, and inflam- matory pain.
c. Concurrent histamine-2-receptor blocker or proton pump inhibitor is recommended with prolonged use given GI side effects.
d. Other adverse effects include interference with platelet aggrega- tion, hepatitis, bronchoconstriction, hypersensitivity reactions, and azotemia. Avoid in patients with severe renal disease, dehydration, or heart failure.
NOTE: Ketorolac is a potent analgesic. Limit duration of therapy to less than 5 days to limit renal toxicity.
C. Opioids (Table 6.2)
1. Produce analgesia by binding to µ receptors in the brain and spinal cord.
2. Side effects: Pruritus, nausea, vomiting, constipation, urine retention, and (rarely) respiratory depression and hypotension. Prescribe a bowel regimen when prescribing opioids.



COMMONLY USED OPIOIDS
Morphine Equivalence
Drug	Ratio	Onset (min)	Duration (hr)	Side Effects	Comments
Fentanyl	80-100	IV: 1-2	0.5-1	Pruritus	Risk of cardiovascular instability is lower than other
Bradycardia	opioids, making it relatively safer in hypovolemia,
Chest wall rigidity with doses >5 mCg/kg (but	congenital heart disease, or head trauma
can occur at all doses); treat with naloxone	Respiratory depressant effect much longer (4 hr)
or neuromuscular blockade.	than analgesic effect
Most commonly used opioid for short, painful proce- dures, but transdermal route is more effective in chronic pain situationsaHydromorphone4-7IV/SQ: 5-10
PO: 30-603-4Less sedation, nausea, and pruritus than morphineMethadone0.25-1bIV: 5-10
PO: 30-604-24Initial dose may produce analgesia for 3-4 hr; dura- tion of action is increased with repeated dosing Useful for neuropathic pain and opioid weaning due
to unique mechanism of NMDA blockadeMorphine1IV: 5-10
IM/SQ: 10-30
PO: 30-60IV: 3-4
IM/SQ/PO: 4-5Seizures in neonates.
Can cause significant histamine release.Available in sustained-release form for chronic painOxycodone1.530-603-4Available in sustained-release form for chronic painaRemoving a transdermal fentanyl patch does not stop opioid uptake from the skin; fentanyl will continue to be absorbed for 12-24 hours after patch removal (fentanyl 25-mCg patch administers 25 mCg/hr of fentanyl).
bMorphine-to-methadone conversion in the tolerant/dependent patient is variable. Consider starting at the lowest conversion ratio: 0.25.
IM, Intramuscular; IV, intravenous; mCg, microgram; PO, by mouth; SQ, subcutaneous.
Data from Yaster M, Cote C, Krane E, et al. Pediatric Pain Management and Sedation Handbook. St. Louis: Mosby; 1997:29-50.

3. Patients with renal failure.
a. Morphine: Avoid use secondary to decreased excretion of the active metabolite that can result in respiratory depression.
b. Preferred choices: Fentanyl, remifentanil, methadone, hydromor- phone, oxycodone.
4. Long-acting opioids (methadone, extended-release tablets, and patches) are not recommended for acute pain.
5. Although opioids are essential for the treatment of moderate to severe pain, a thoughtful approach is recommended with the quantity that
is dispensed, as studies have shown that over 50% of opioid doses dispensed are not consumed.8 There is need for further research to develop evidence-based opioid prescribing guidelines for treating acute pain in children.
D. Local Anesthetics9-12
Administered topically or subcutaneously to surround peripheral nerves (peripheral block) or centrally (epidural/spinal block). Temporarily block nerve conduction at the sodium channel.
1. For all local anesthetics, 1% solution = 10 mg/mLb
2. Topical local anesthetics (Table 6.3)12
3. Injectable local anesthetics (Table 6.4):
a. Subcutaneous infiltration of the skin at the site: Used for painful procedures such as wound closure or lumbar puncture.
b. Use of a 27- to 30-gauge needle, alkalization, warming the solution to 37°C to 42°C, and a slow injection can reduce stinging from injec- tion. Alkalinize by adding 1 mL (1 mEqc) sodium bicarbonate to 9 mL lidocaine (or 29 mL bupivacaine).
c. To enhance efficacy and duration, add epinephrine (5 to 10 mCgd of epinephrine to 1 mL of local anesthetic) to decrease vascular uptake. Never use local anesthetics with epinephrine in areas supplied by end arteries (e.g., pinna, fingers, toes, nasal tip, penis).
d. Maximum volume (mL) = (maximum mg/kg dose × weight in kg)/(% solution × 10). See Table 6.4 for maximum doses.
e. Toxicity: Central nervous system (CNS) and cardiac toxicity are of greatest concern. CNS symptoms are seen before cardiovascular col- lapse. Always calculate the maximum volume of the local anesthetic and always draw up less than that. Bupivacaine is associated with more severe cardiac toxicity than lidocaine.
(1) Progression of symptoms: Perioral numbness ? dizziness ? auditory disturbances ? muscular twitching ? unconscious- ness ? seizures ? coma ? respiratory arrest ? cardiovascular collapse.

amL, milliliter.
bmEq, milliequivalent.
cmCg, microgram.





COMMONLY USED TOPICAL LOCAL ANESTHETICS
ComponentsIndicationsPeak EffectDurationaCautionsEMLALidocaine 2.5%
Prilocaine 2.5%Intact skin only
Venipuncture, circumcision, LP,60 min90 minMethemoglobinemia: Not for use in patients predisposed to methemoglobinemiaabscess drainage, BMA(G6PD deficiency)Infants <3 months of age: Use sparingly (up
to 1 g is safe)LMXLidocaine 4%Same as EMLA30 min60 minSame as EMLALETLidocaine 4%
Epinephrine 0.1%
Tetracaine 0.5%
Can be mixed with cellulose to create a gelSafe for nonintact skin/ lacerations
Can be used to attain hemostasis
with simple lacerations30 min45 minVasoconstriction: Contraindicated in areas supplied by end arteries (e.g., pinna, nose, penis, digits)
Avoid contact with mucous membranesNot for use in contaminated woundsViscous
lidocaineLidocaine 2%
(May be mixed with Aluminum/MagnesiumSafe for nonintact skin
Mucous membranes (e.g., urethral10 min30 minOveruse can lead to life-threatening toxicity Not to be used for teethingHydroxide/Simethicone (Maalox) andcatheter placement, mucositis)diphenhydramine in a 1 :1:1 ratio for palat-ability when administered orally)aApproximate.
BMA, Bone marrow aspiration; EMLA, eutectic mixture of local anesthetics; G6PD, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase; LP, lumbar puncture; min, minutes.
Data from Krauss B, Green SM. Sedation and analgesia for procedures in children. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:938-945; and Zempsky W, Cravero J. Relief of pain and anxiety in pediatric patients in emergency medical systems. Pediatrics. 2004;114:1348-1356.




COMMONLY USED INJECTABLE LOCAL ANESTHETICS1,10
AgentConcentration (%)aMax Dose (mg/kg)Onset (min)Duration (hr)Lidocaine0.5-2530.5-2Lidocaine with
epinephrine0.5-2731-3Bupivacaine0.25-0.752.5152-4Bupivacaine with
epinephrine0.25-0.753154-8Bupivacaine with Lidocaine mixtureVariableb3-150.5-4a(1% solution = 10 mg/mL).
b[(mg/kg used of bupivacaine)/2.5 mg/kg × 100] + [(mg/kg used of lidocaine)/5 mg/kg × 100]. Toxicity occurs when the sum is >100%.
Data from St Germain BA. The management of pain in the emergency department. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2000;47:651- 679; Yaster M, Cote C, Krane E, et al. Pediatric Pain Management and Sedation Handbook. St. Louis: Mosby; 1997:51-72.


Lipid emulsion 20%
(Precise volume and flow rate are not crucial)Greater than 70 kg patientLess than 70 kg patientBolus 100 mL lipid emulsion 20%
rapidly over 2-3 minutes
• Lipid emulsion infusion
200-250 mL over 15-20
minutesBolus 1.5 mL/kg lipid emulsion 20%
rapidly over 2-3 minutes
• Lipid emulsion infusion
~0.25 mL/kg/min (ideal body weight)If patient remains unstable:
• Re-bolus once or twice at the same dose and double infusion rate; be aware of dosing limit (12mL/kg)
• Total volume of lipid emulsion can approach 1 L in a prolonged
resuscitation (e.g., >30 minutes) FIGURE 6.2 
Lipid emulsion 20%.

(2) Summary of American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine (ASRA) Checklist for Treatment of Local Anesthetic Systemic Toxicity (LAST) (https://www.asra.com/content/docume nts/asra_last_checklist_2018.pdf)
(a) Stop injecting local anesthetic.
(b) Call for help and obtain 20% lipid emulsion (see Fig. 6.2 for dosing).
(c) Manage airway: ventilate with 100% FiO2 (fraction of inspired oxygen), insert advanced airway if needed.
(d) Control seizures with benzodiazepines; avoid large doses of propofol due to the potential to exacerbate hypotension.

(e) Treat hypotension and bradycardia-start cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) if pulseless. Avoid hyperventilation.
(3) If concerned for systemic toxicity, contact an anesthesiologist and call poison control (1-800-222-1222).
E. Nonpharmacologic Measures of Pain Relief13,14
1. Sucrose for neonates (Sweet-Ease):
a. Indications: Painful minor procedures (heel lance, venipuncture, and intramuscular injection) in neonates and infants. Has not been shown to be effective for relief of circumcision pain. Strongest evidence for infants aged 0 to 1 month,13 but additional evidence suggests efficacy up to 12 months.14
b. Procedure: Administer up to 2 mL of 24% sucrose into the infant's mouth by syringe or from a nipple/pacifier ~2 minutes before the procedure. Effective doses in very low-birth-weight infants may be as low as 0.05 to 0.1 mL.
c. An additional dose may be administered within a relatively short period of time for multiple procedures, but it should not be adminis- tered more than twice in 1 hour.
d. Use along with other age-appropriate nonpharmacologic measures listed below.
e. Avoid if patient is unable to appropriately feed by mouth or cannot safely handle oral secretions.
2. Other: Parental presence/holding, distraction with toys, child life spe- cialists, guided meditation/coping skills, virtual reality simulations.

 III. PATIENT-CONTROLLED ANALGESIA (PCA)	
A. Definition
PCA enables a patient to receive a limited number of small doses (boluses) of an analgesic with or without a continuous (basal) infusion on an as- needed basis. In children younger than 6 years old or with physical/mental disability, a family member, caregiver, or nurse may administer supplemen- tal (bolus) doses.
B. Indications
1. Moderate to severe pain of acute or chronic nature. Commonly used in sickle cell disease, postsurgery, posttrauma, burns, and cancer.
2. Useful for preemptive pain management (e.g., dressing changes).
C. Routes of Administration
IV or epidural
D. Agents (Table 6.5)
E. Adjuvants
1. Low-dose naloxone (Narcan) infusion reduces incidence of pruritus and nausea associated with narcotic administration.




ORDERS FOR PATIENT-CONTROLLED ANALGESIA
Basal RateBolus DoseLockout PeriodBolusesMax DoseDrug(mCg/kg/hr)(mCg/kg)(min)(hr)(mCg/kg/hr)Morphine10-3010-306-104-6100-150Hydromorphone3-53-56-104-615-20Fentanyl0.5-10.5-1.06-102-32-4mCg, Microgram.
Data from Yaster M, Cote C, Krane E, et al. Pediatric Pain Management and Sedation Handbook. St. Louis: Mosby; 1997:100.

2. Low-dose ketamine infusion has a narcotic sparing effect. It is espe- cially helpful in chemotherapy-induced mucositis, visceral pain, and neuropathic pain. Its mechanism of action is by N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) blockade. May be used with or as an alternative to methadone.
F. Side Effects of Opioid Patient-Controlled Analgesia
Pruritus, nausea, constipation, urine retention, excessive drowsiness, and respiratory depression.

A. Indications
Because of the development of dependence and potential for withdrawal, a tapering schedule is required if the patient has received frequent opioid analgesics for >5 days.
B. Withdrawal
1. See Box 18.1 for symptoms of opioid withdrawal.
2. Onset of signs and symptoms: 6 to 12 hours after the last dose of mor- phine and 36 to 48 hours after the last dose of methadone.
3. Duration: 7 to 14 days, with a peak intensity reached within 2 to 4 days.
C. Recommendations for Tapering
1. Conversion: All drugs should be converted to a single equi-analgesic member of that group (see Table 6.2).
2. PCA wean: Drug dosing should be changed from continuous/intermit- tent IV infusion to PO basal/bolus therapy. If the patient is on PCA, once the first PO dose is administered, the PCA basal infusion should be stopped 30 to 60 minutes later. PCA bolus doses should be continued but reduced by 25% to 50%. If no further bolus doses are administered in the next 6 hours, the PCA should be discontinued. If the patient continues to experience pain, consider increasing scheduled PO dose, administering a rescue one-time PO bolus dose, or adding an adjuvant analgesic (e.g., NSAID).
3. Slow dose decrease: During an intermittent IV/PO wean, the total daily dose should be decreased by 10% to 20% of the original dose every 1 to 2 days (e.g., to taper a morphine dose of 40 mg/day, decrease the daily dose by 4 to 8 mg every 1 to 2 days).

4. Oral regimen: If not done previously, IV dosing should be converted to equivalent PO administration 1 to 2 days before discharge, and titration should be continued as outlined previously.
5. Adjunctive therapy:
a. Clonidine in combination with an opioid decreases the length of time needed for opioid weaning in neonatal abstinence syndrome, with few short-term side effects. Long-term safety has yet to be thor- oughly investigated, but follow-up after 1 year on motor, cognitive, and language scores showed no difference in those treated with clonidine.15,16
b. PO and transdermal clonidine have a potential role for sedation, analgesia, and iatrogenic drug withdrawal in critically ill children, but current reports are retrospective or small clinical trials with significant heterogeneity in dosing, so further research is necessary.
Transdermal dosing should not be used in children aged <1 year due to altered skin absorption.17
c. Studies have shown efficacy of a2-adrenergic agonists in treating opi- oid withdrawal and reducing doses of methadone, but the duration of treatment was longer with a2-adrenergic agonists, and there were fewer adverse effects with methadone.18
d. Dexmedetomidine is an a2-adrenoreceptor agonist, which produces sedation and mild analgesia, with minimal to no respiratory depres- sion. Administered as a continuous infusion, it has been shown to reduce opioid requirements and facilitate opioid weaning.
D. Examples
See Box EC 6.A for example of opioid wean.


 V. PROCEDURAL SEDATION1,9-12,19-21	
A. Definitions
1. Mild sedation (anxiolysis): Intent is anxiolysis with maintenance of consciousness.
2. Moderate sedation: Formerly known as conscious sedation. A con- trolled state of depressed consciousness during which airway reflexes and patency are maintained. Patient responds appropriately to
age-appropriate commands (e.g., "Open your eyes") and light touch. Practically obtained any time a combination of a sedative-hypnotic and an analgesic are used.
3. Deep sedation: A controlled state of depressed consciousness during which airway reflexes and patency may not be maintained, and the child is unable to respond to physical or verbal stimuli. In practice, deep sedation is required for most painful procedures in children. Practically obtained with propofol.
4. Dissociative sedation: Unique state of sedation achieved with ket- amine characterized by a deep level of depressed consciousness and




FASTING RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ANESTHESIA
Food TypeMinimum Fasting Period (hr)Clear liquids2Breast milk4Nonhuman milk, formula6Solids8Data from Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures. A report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Preoperative Fasting and Use of Pharmacological Agents to Reduce the Risk of Pulmonary Aspiration (Online). http://anesthesiology.pubs.asahq.org/article.aspx?articleid=1933410.

analgesia. Airway reflexes and patency are generally maintained; how- ever, excessive oral secretions may become problematic, occasionally resulting in micro-aspiration or laryngospasm.
B. Preparation
1. The patient should be NPO for solids and liquids (Table 6.6).19 Per American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) and American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) guidelines, children receiving moderate sedation for elective procedures should follow the same fasting guidelines as those for general anesthesia.20,22 For urgent/emergent sedation when children are not NPO, the risks of sedation and possible aspiration must be balanced against the benefits of performing the procedure promptly. Recent studies suggest that NPO status for liquids and solids may not be statistically associated with aspiration, although studies are limited as aspiration is a relatively uncommon complication.23
2. Focused patient history:
a. Allergies, medications, and any history of a previous reaction to anesthesia or sedation.
b. Assess for the possibility of an adverse airway event occurring with sedation (hypoxemia, hypercarbia, inability to mask venti- late, etc.). This can occur from: (1) mechanical airway obstruc- tion (micrognathia, tonsillar and/or adenoid hypertrophy, large tongue, history of snoring, presence of noisy breathing, diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea, obesity, presence of a craniofacial syndrome), (2) lung disease (history of prematurity, chronic lung disease or bronchopulmonary dysplasia, asthma), or (3) presence of a recent upper respiratory infection (URI). A history of a URI increases the risk of laryngospasm and/or bronchospasm; there- fore, one must weigh the risks/benefits of providing sedation after a recent URI versus need for immediate interventional procedure. For elective procedures requiring sedation, it is best to wait 2 to
4 weeks after resolution of illness to reduce the risk of an adverse event.24
c. Assess aspiration risk (neuromuscular disease, esophageal disease, altered mental status, obesity, pregnancy).



BID, Twice daily; IV, intravenous; mg, milligram; PCA, patient controlled analgesia; PO, by mouth;
TID, three times daily.
Data from Yaster M, Cote C, Krane E, et al. Pediatric Pain Management and Sedation Handbook. St. Louis: Mosby; 1997:29-50.














Grade I	Grade II

















 FIGURE 6.3 


Grade III


Grade IV

Mallampati classification system.

d. Presence of kidney/liver disease (may prolong sedative effect) and cardiac disease (potential for hemodynamic instability with sedative administration).
3. Physical examination: Specific attention to mouth opening and neck extension. Use the Mallampati classification system to assess the airway for likelihood of difficult direct laryngoscopy and intubation (Fig. 6.3).
4. Determine ASA Physical Status Classification (Table 6.7): Class I and II patients are generally good candidates for mild, moderate, or deep sedation outside of the operating room.20




ASA PHYSICAL STATUS CLASSIFICATION
Class I	A normally healthy patient
Class II	A patient with mild systemic disease (e.g., controlled reactive airway disease)

Class IV	A patient with severe systemic disease that is
a constant threat to life (e.g., a child with status asthmaticus)

Class VI	A declared brain-dead patient whose organs are being removed for donor purposes


5. Always have an emergency plan ready:
a. Make sure qualified backup personnel and equipment are close by.
b. Complications most often occur 5 to 10 minutes after admin- istration of IV medication and immediately after a procedure is completed (when the stimuli associated with the procedure are removed).11
6. Personnel: Two providers are required. One provider should perform the procedure, and a separate provider should monitor the patient dur- ing sedation and recovery.
7. Ensure IV access prior to induction by flushing with saline. Subcutaneous infiltration of a sedative can cause unpredictable or prolonged sedation.
8. Have airway/intubation equipment immediately available (see Chapter 1).
9. Emergency medications: Always have emergency medications for rapid sequence intubation and CPR immediately available.
10. Reversal agents should be readily available (naloxone, flumazenil).
C. Monitoring
1. Vital signs: Baseline vital signs should be obtained. Heart rate, oxygen saturation, and respiratory rate should be continuously monitored, and blood pressure monitored intermittently (every 3 to 5 minutes) until a pre-sedation level of consciousness is achieved. NOTE: Unrecognized apnea is often followed by desaturation within 1 to 2 minutes when not receiving supplemental oxygenation. Administration of supplemental oxygen can further delay recognition of apnea because the onset of desaturation may occur more than 2 minutes after apnea.
2. Airway: Airway patency and adequacy of ventilation should be fre- quently assessed through capnography (e.g., continuous end-tidal

carbon dioxide [CO2]), auscultation, and direct visualization. This can help ensure immediate recognition of apnea, and appropriate measures may be taken before desaturation occurs.
D. Pharmacologic Agents
1. Goal of procedural sedation: The administration of medications to pro- vide appropriate levels of analgesia, sedation, and anxiolysis so that the procedure can occur without the need to secure the airway.
2. CNS, cardiovascular, and respiratory depression may always occur; occurs more commonly when combining sedative drugs and/or opioids, or with rapid drug administration. It is always best to titrate medications to the desired level of sedation.
3. Common sedative/hypnotic agents (Box 6.1). Also see Table 6.2 and Table 6.8 for more information on opioids and barbiturates/ benzodiazepines.
4. Reversal agents:
a. Naloxone: Opioid antagonist. See Box 6.2 for naloxone administration protocol.
b. Flumazenil: Benzodiazepine antagonist.
E. Discharge Criteria20
1. The patient can maintain a patent airway without requiring supple- mental oxygen. There should also be no compromise in cardiovascular function.
2. The patient should be easily arousable with intact protective airway reflexes (swallow, cough, and gag).
3. The patient should have the ability to talk and sit up unaided (if age appropriate). Alternatively, for very young or intellectually disabled chil- dren, the goal is to return to their pre-sedation level of responsiveness.
4. Ensure ability to maintain adequate hydration (i.e., the patient can toler- ate enteral fluids).
F. Examples of Sedation Protocols (Table 6.9 and Table EC 6.A)



BOX 6.1-cont'd Benzodiazepines
• Reversible with flumazenil
• Anxiolytic effects; no analgesic effects
Opioids
• Reversible with naloxone
• Analgesic effects; no anxiolytic effects
Ketamine1,10-13
• Causes potent dissociative amnesia and analgesia
• Nystagmus indicates likely therapeutic effect
• Vocalizations/movement may occur even with adequate sedation
• Onset: IV, 0.5-2 min; IM, 5-10 min; PO/PR, 20-45 min
• Duration: IV, 20-60 min; IM, 30-90 min; PO/PR, 60-120+ min
• CNS effects: Emergence delirium with auditory, visual, and tactile hallucinations
• Cardiovascular effects: Inhibits catecholamine reuptake, thereby causing increased HR, BP, SVR, and PVR. Rarely causes hemodynamic instability; however, in catecholamine-deplete patients (e.g., shock) it can cause direct myocardial depression and hypotension.
• Respiratory effects: Bronchodilation (useful in asthmatics), increased secre- tions (can result in laryngospasm), maintenance of ventilatory response to hypoxia, relative maintenance of airway reflexes
• Other effects: Increased muscle tone, myoclonic jerks, nausea, emesis
• Contraindications: Hypertension and preexisting psychotic disorders. Controversy exists on its safety in patients with elevated ICP or IOP. Evidence suggesting ketamine elevates intracranial pressure or causes harm in these patients is limited.
Propofol
• For deep sedation or general anesthesia
• Administered as single or multiple IV boluses +/- infusion
• Rapid onset and brief recovery (5-15 min) with bolus administration
• Can have antiemetic and euphoric effects
• Caution: Respiratory depression, apnea, hypotension
• Anxiolytic; no analgesic effects
Dexmedetomidine
• Give IV load over 10 min, followed by infusion.
• Dexmedetomidine can also be given intranasally. It will take 30-60 min to attain natural sleep, and patients will briefly awaken with stimulation.
• Rapid onset and brief recovery (5-15 min)
• Does not cause respiratory depression or apnea. Can cause hypotension and bradycardia, especially when IV load given too quickly.
• Anxiolytic and analgesic effects
• Increased cost compared with other medications
Nitrous Oxide
• Inhaled gas delivered as a mixture with oxygen
• Amnestic, anxiolytic, and analgesic effects

Continued




BP, Blood pressure; CNS, central nervous system; HR, heart rate; ICP, intracranial pressure; IM, intramuscular; IOP, intraocular pressure; IV, intravenous; PO, oral; PR, rectal; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; SVR, systemic vascular resistance.

Data from Yaster M, Cote C, Krane E, et al. Pediatric Pain Management and Sedation Handbook. St. Louis: Mosby; 1997:376-382; St Germain BA. The management of pain in the emergency depart- ment. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2000;47:651-679; and Cote CJ, Lerman J, Todres ID, et al. A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2001.




SUGGESTED ANALGESIA AND SEDATION PROTOCOLS
Pain ThresholdProcedureSuggested ChoicesNonpainfulCT/MRI/EEG/ECHOMidazolamaMildPhlebotomy/IVEMLALP
Pelvic exam
Minor laceration, well vascularized Minor laceration, not well vascularizedEMLA (± midazolam), lidocaine Midazolam
LET
LidocaineModerateBM aspiration
ArthrocentesisEMLA (±midazolam)
Lidocaine (local) for cooperativechild or ketamine for uncoopera-
tive childFracture reduction Major laceration Burn debridement
Long procedures (>30 min)Ketamine
Ketamine or fentanyl + midazolam Ketamine or fentanyl + midazolam Consider general anesthesiaSevereFracture reductionKetamineLong procedures (>30 min)Consider general anesthesiaaConsult with neurologist prior to administering a benzodiazepine for sedation during EEG.
BM, Bone marrow; CT, computed tomography; ECHO, echocardiogram; EEG, electroencephalogram; EMLA, eutectic mixture of local anesthetics; LP, lumbar puncture; LET, lidocaine, epinephrine, tetracaine; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
Modified from Yaster M, Cote C, Krane E, et al. Pediatric Pain Management and Sedation Handbook. St. Louis: Mosby; 1997:551-552.





COMMONLY USED BENZODIAZEPINESa AND BARBITURATES1,4

Drug ClassDuration of Action
Drug
Route
Onset (min)
Duration (hr)
CommentsBenzodiazepinesShortMidazolam (Versed)IV1-31-2Has rapid and predictable onset of action, short recovery timeIM/IN5-10Causes amnesiaPO/PR10-30Results in mild depression of hypoxic ventilatory driveIntermediateDiazepam (Valium)IV (painful)1-30.25-1Poor choice for procedural sedationPR7-152-3Excellent for muscle relaxation or prolonged sedationPO30-602-3Painful on IV injectionLongLorazepam (Ativan)IV1-53-4Poor choice for procedural sedationIM10-203-6Ideal for prolonged anxiolysis, seizure treatmentPO30-603-6BarbituratesShortMethohexitalPRb5-101-1.5PR form used as sedative for nonpainful procedureIntermediatePentobarbitalIV1-101-4Predictable sedation and immobility for nonpainful proceduresIM5-152-4Minimal respiratory depression when used alonePO/PR15-602-4Associated with slow wake up and agitationaUse IV solution for PO, PR, and IN administration. Rectal diazepam gel (Diastat) is also available.
bIV administration produces general anesthesia; only PR should be used for sedation.
IM, Intramuscular; IN, intranasal; IV, intravenous; min, minute; PO, by mouth; PR, per rectum.
Data from Yaster M, Cote C, Krane E, et al. Pediatric Pain Management and Sedation Handbook. St. Louis: Mosby; 1997:345-374; St Germain BA. The management of pain in the emergency department. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2000;47:651-679; and Cote CJ, Lerman J, Todres ID, et al. A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2001.


BOX 6.2
NALOXONE (NARCAN) ADMINISTRATIONa
Indications: Patients Requiring Naloxone (Narcan) Usually Meet All the Following Criteria
• Shallow respirations or respiratory rate <8 breaths/minb
• Pinpoint pupils
• Unresponsive to physical stimulation
Procedure
1. Stop opioid administration (as well as other sedative drugs), assess ABCs
(Airway, Breathing, Circulation), and call for help.
2. Dilute naloxone:
a. If child >40 kg: Mix 0.4 mg (1 ampule) of naloxone with 9 mL of normal saline (final concentration 0.04 mg/mL = 40 mCg/mL)
b. If child <40 kg: Mix 0.4 mg (1 ampule) of naloxone with 9 mL of normal saline to make a concentration of 40 mCg/mL (as above). Then, repeat dilution by mixing 1 mL of the 40 mCg/mL solution with 9 mL of normal saline for final concentration of 4 mCg/mL.
3. Administer and observe response: Administer dilute naloxone slowly (1-2 mCg/ kg/dose IV over 2 minutes). Observe patient response.
4. Titrate to effect: Within 1-2 minutes, patient should open eyes and respond. If not, continue until a total dose of 10 mCg/kg is given. If no response is obtained, evaluate for other cause of sedation/respiratory depression.
5. Discontinue naloxone administration: Discontinue naloxone as soon as patient responds (e.g., takes deep breaths when directed).
6. Caution: Another dose of naloxone may be required within 30 min of first dose (duration of action of naloxone is shorter than that of most opioids).
7. Monitor patient: Assign a staff member to monitor sedation/respiratory status and remind patient to take deep breaths as necessary.
8. Alternative analgesia: Provide nonopioids for pain relief. Resume opioid administration at half the original dose when the patient is easily aroused, and respiratory rate is >9 breaths/min.

aNaloxone administration for patients being treated for pain. Higher doses may be necessary for patients found in the community or those with signs of cardiopulmonary failure. Please see formu- lary for additional dosing.
bRespiratory rates that require naloxone vary according to infant's/child's usual rate.
IV, Intravenous; kg, kilogram; mCg, microgram; mg, milligram; mL, milliliter.
Modified from McCaffery M, Pasero C. Pain: Clinical Manual. St. Louis: Mosby; 1999:269-270.

144	Part II Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information


EXAMPLES OF SEDATION PROTOCOLS
Protocol/Doses	Comments

aGreen, SM, Roback MG, Krauss B, et al. Predictors of emesis and recovery agitation with emergency department ketamine sedation: an individual-patient data meta-analysis of 8,282 children. Ann Emerg Med. 2009;54:171-180. IM, Intramuscular; IV, intravenous; mCg, microgram; PRN, as needed.
Modified from Yaster M, Cote C, Krane E, et al. Pediatric Pain Management and Sedation Handbook. St. Louis: Mosby; 1997.

• International Association for the Study of Pain: http://childpain.org/
• American Pain Society: http://www.ampainsoc.org/
• American Society of Anesthesiologists: http://www.asahq.org/

A complete list of references can be found online at www.expertconsult.com.

 REFERENCES	
1. Yaster M, Cote C, Krane E, et al. Pediatric Pain Management and Sedation Handbook. St Louis: Mosby; 1997.
2. Manworren R, Hynan L. Clinical validation of FLACC: preverbal patient pain scale. Pediatr Nurs. 2003;29:140-146.
3. Malviya S, Voepel-Lewis T. The revised FLACC observational pain tool: improved reliability and validity for pain assessment in children with cognitive impairment. Paediatr Anaesth. 2006;16:258-265.
4. FDA Drug Safety Communication: Safety review update of codeine use in chil- dren; new Boxed Warning and Contraindication on use after tonsillectomy and/ or adenoidectomy. 02-2013. http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm339112. htm.
5. Wong C, Lau E, Palozzi L, Campbell F. Pain management in children: part 2a transition from codeine to morphine for moderate to severe pain in children. Can Pharm J (Ott). 2012;145(6):276-279.e1. https://doi.org/10.3821/145.6. cpj276.
6. Benner KW, Durham SH. Meperidine restriction in a pediatric hospital. J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther. 2011;16(3):185-190.
7. Jenco M. FDA issues warning on tramadol use in those under age 17. AAP News. 2015;22.
8. Monitto CL, Hsu A, Gao S, et al. Opioid prescribing for the treatment of acute pain in children on hospital discharge. Anesth Analg. 2017;125:2113.
9. Yaster M, Maxwell LG. Pediatric regional anesthesia. Anesthesiology. 1989;70:324-338.
10. St Germain BA. The management of pain in the emergency department. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2000;47:651-679.
11. Krauss B, Green S. Procedural sedation and analgesia in children. Lancet. 2006;367:766-780.
12. Fein J, Zempsky W, Cravero J. Relief of pain and anxiety in pediatric patients in emergency medical systems. Pediatrics. 2012;130(5):e1391-e1405. https://doi. org/10.1542/peds.2012-2536.
13. Stevens B, Yamada J, Ohlsson A, Haliburton S, Shorkey A. Sucrose for analgesia in newborn infants undergoing painful procedures. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;(7):CD001069. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD001069.pub5.
14. Kassab M, Foster JP, Foureur M, Fowler C. Sweet-tasting solutions for needle- related procedural pain in infants one month to one year of age. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(12):CD008411. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858. CD008411.pub2.
15. Agthe AG, Kim GR, Mathias KB, et al. Clonidine as an adjunct therapy to opi- oids for neonatal abstinence syndrome: a randomized, controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2009;123:e849-e856.
16. Bada HS, Sithisarn T, Gibson J, et al. Morphine versus clonidine for neonatal abstinence syndrome. Pediatrics. 2015;135:e383.
17. Capino AC, Miller JL, Johnson PN. Clonidine for sedation and analgesia and withdrawal in critically ill infants and children. Pharmacotherapy. 2016;36:1290- 1299. https://doi.org/10.1002/phar.1850.
18. Gowing L, Farrell M, Ali R, White JM. Alpha-adrenergic agonists for the man- agement of opioid withdrawal. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;(5):CD002024. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD002024.pub5.
19. Coté CJ, Lerman J, Anderson B. A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019.

144.e2	References

20. Coté C, Wilson S. Guidelines for monitoring and management of pediatric patients before, during, and after sedation for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures: update 2016. Pediatrics. 2016:e20161212. https://doi.org/10.1542/ peds.2016-1212.
21. Practice guidelines for sedation and analgesia by non-anesthesiologists.
Anesthesiology. 2002;96:1004-1017.
22. Practice guidelines for moderate procedural sedation and analge-
sia 2018. Anesthesiology. 2018;128(3):437-479. https://doi.org/10.1097/ aln.0000000000002043.
23. Beach ML, Cohen DM, Gallagher SM, et al. Major adverse events and relation- ship to nil per os status in pediatric sedation/anesthesia outside the operating room: a report of the pediatric sedation research consortium. Anesthesiology. 2016;124(1):80-88.
24. Mallory MD, Travers C, McCracken CE, et al. Upper respiratory infections and airway adverse events in pediatric procedural sedation. Pediatrics. 2017;140.







 See additional content on Expert Consult

Chapter 7
Cardiology
Aoibhinn Nyhan, MD


 I. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION	
A. Heart Rate
Refer to the inside front cover for normal heart rate (HR) by age.
B. Blood Pressure
1. Blood pressure (BP):
See Tables 7.1 and 7.2 for normal BP values (systolic blood pressure [SBP], diastolic blood pressure [DBP]) by age.1,2
2. Mean arterial pressure (MAP)
a. MAP = diastolic pressure + (pulse pressure/3) OR 1/3 systolic pressure + 2/3 diastolic pressure.
b. Preterm infants and newborns: Normal MAP = gestational age in weeks + 5.
3. Abnormalities in BP
a. Four-limb BP measurements can be used to assess for coarctation of the aorta.
b. Pulsus paradoxus: Exaggeration of the normal drop in SBP with inspiration. Determine SBP at the end of exhalation and during inhalation; difference >10 mmHg consider pericardial effusion, tam- ponade, pericarditis, severe asthma, or restrictive cardiomyopathies.
4. Hypertension (HTN)
a. See Chapter 1 for management of acute HTN.
b. See Chapter 19 for screening, work-up, and management of chronic HTN.
C. Heart Sounds
1. S1: Associated with closure of mitral and tricuspid valves; heard best at the apex or left lower sternal border (LLSB).
2. S2: Associated with closure of pulmonary and aortic valves; heard best at the left upper sternal border (LUSB) and has normal physiologic split- ting that increases with inspiration.
3. S3: Heard best at the apex or LLSB.
4. S4: Heard at the apex.
D. Systolic and Diastolic Sounds
See Box 7.1 for abnormal heart sounds.3
E. Murmurs4
Clinical characteristics are summarized in Table 7.3.3



BLOOD PRESSURE LEVELS FOR THE 50TH, 90TH, 95TH, AND 99TH PERCENTILES OF BLOOD PRESSURE FOR GIRLS AGED 1-17 YEARS BY PERCENTILES OF HEIGHT

Age
(years) BP Percentile

SBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height

DBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height


5%10%25%50%75%90%95%5%10%25%50%75%90%95%1Height (in)29.730.230.931.832.733.433.929.730.230.931.832.733.433.9Height (cm)75.476.678.680.88384.986.175.476.678.680.88384.986.150th848586868788884142424344454690th9899991001011021025455565657585895th1011021021031041051055959606061626295th + 12 mmHg113114114115116117117717172727374742Height (in)33.43434.935.936.937.838.433.43434.935.936.937.838.4Height (cm)84.986.388.691.193.79697.484.986.388.691.193.79697.450th878788899091914546474849505190th1011011021031041051065858596061626295th1041051061061071081096263636465666695th + 12 mmHg116117118118119120121747575767778783Height (in)35.836.437.338.439.640.641.235.836.437.338.439.640.641.2Height (cm)9192.494.997.6100.5103.1104.69192.494.997.6100.5103.1104.650th888989909192934848495051535390th1021031041041051061076061616263646595th1061061071081091101106465656667686995th + 12 mmHg11811811912012112212276777778798081Continued

Age
(years) BP Percentile


SBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height


DBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height


5%10%25%50%75%90%95%5%10%25%50%75%90%95%4Height (in)38.338.939.941.142.443.544.238.338.939.941.142.443.544.2Height (cm)97.298.8101.4104.5107.6110.5112.297.298.8101.4104.5107.6110.5112.250th899091929394945051515354555590th1031041051061071081086263646566676795th1071081091091101111126667686970707195th + 12 mmHg119120121121122123124787980818282835Height (in)40.841.542.643.945.246.547.340.841.542.643.945.246.547.3Height (cm)103.6105.3108.2111.5114.9118.1120103.6105.3108.2111.5114.9118.112050th909192939495965252535556575790th1041051061071081091106465666768697095th1081091091101111121136869707172737395th + 12 mmHg120121121122123124125808182838485856Height (in)43.34445.246.648.149.450.343.44445.246.648.149.450.3Height (cm)110111.8114.9118.4122.1125.6127.7110111.8114.9118.4122.1125.6127.750th929293949697975454555657585990th1051061071081091101116767686970717195th1091091101111121131147071727273747495th + 12 mmHg121121122123124125126828384848586867Height (in)45.646.447.749.250.752.15345.646.447.749.250.752.153Height (cm)115.9117.8121.1124.9128.8132.5134.7115.9117.8121.1124.9128.8132.5134.750th929394959798995555565758596090th1061061071091101111126868697071727295th1091101111121131141157272737374747595th + 12 mmHg12112212312412512612784848585868687Continued


Age
(years) BP Percentile


SBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height


DBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height


5%10%25%50%75%90%95%5%10%25%50%75%90%95%8Height (in)47.648.449.851.45354.555.547.648.449.851.45354.555.5Height (cm)121123126.5130.6134.7138.5140.9121123126.5130.6134.7138.5140.950th9394959798991005656575960616190th1071071081101111121136970717272737395th1101111121131151161177273747475757595th + 12 mmHg122123124125127128129848586878787879Height (in)49.350.251.753.455.156.757.749.350.251.753.455.156.757.7Height (cm)125.3127.6131.3135.6140.1144.1146.6125.3127.6131.3135.6140.1144.1146.650th95959798991001015758596060616190th1081081091111121131147171727373737395th1121121131141161171187474757575757595th + 12 mmHg1241241251261281291308686878787878710Height (in)51.15253.755.557.459.160.251.15253.755.557.459.160.2Height (cm)129.7132.2136.3141145.8150.2152.8129.7132.2136.3141145.8150.2152.850th969798991011021035859596061616290th1091101111121131151167273737373737395th1131141141161171191207575767676767695th + 12 mmHg1251261261281291311328787888888888811Height (in)53.454.556.258.260.261.96353.454.556.258.260.261.963Height (cm)135.6138.3142.8147.8152.8157.3160135.6138.3142.8147.8152.8157.316050th98991011021041051066060606162636490th1111121131141161181207474747474757595th1151161171181201231247677777777777795th + 12 mmHg12712812913013213513688898989898989Continued

Age
(years) BP Percentile

SBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height

DBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height


5%10%25%50%75%90%95%5%10%25%50%75%90%95%12Height (in)56.257.35960.962.864.565.556.257.35960.962.864.565.5Height (cm)142.8145.5149.9154.8159.6163.8166.4142.8145.5149.9154.8159.6163.8166.450th1021021041051071081086161616264656590th1141151161181201221227575757576767695th1181191201221241251267878787879797995th + 12 mmHg1301311321341361371389090909091919113Height (in)58.359.360.962.764.566.16758.359.360.962.764.566.167Height (cm)148.1150.6154.7159.2163.7167.8170.2148.1150.6154.7159.2163.7167.8170.250th1041051061071081081096262636465656690th1161171191211221231237575757676767695th1211221231241261261277979797980808195th + 12 mmHg1331341351361381381399191919192929314Height (in)59.360.261.863.565.266.867.759.360.261.863.565.266.867.7Height (cm)150.6153156.9161.3165.7169.7172.1150.6153156.9161.3165.7169.7172.150th1051061071081091091096363646566666690th1181181201221231231237676767677777795th1231231241251261271278080808081818295th + 12 mmHg1351351361371381391399292929293939415Height (in)59.760.662.263.965.667.268.159.760.662.263.965.667.268.1Height (cm)151.7154157.9162.3166.7170.6173151.7154157.9162.3166.7170.617350th1051061071081091091096464646566676790th1181191211221231231247676767777787895th1241241251261271271288080808182828295th + 12 mmHg13613613713813913914092929293949494
Continued







Age
(years) BP Percentile

SBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height

DBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height


5%10%25%50%75%90%95%5%10%25%50%75%90%95%16Height (in)59.960.862.464.165.867.368.359.960.862.464.165.867.368.3Height (cm)152.1154.5158.4162.8167.1171.1173.4152.1154.5158.4162.8167.1171.1173.450th1061071081091091101106464656666676790th1191201221231241241247676767778787895th1241251251271271281288080808182828295th + 12 mmHg1361371371391391401409292929394949417Height (in)60.060.962.564.265.967.468.460.060.962.564.265.967.468.4Height (cm)152.4154.7158.7163.0167.4171.3173.7152.4154.7158.7163.0167.4171.3173.750th1071081091101101101116464656666666790th1201211231241241251257676777778787895th1251251261271281281288080808182828295th + 12 mmHg13713713813914014014092929293949494BP, Blood pressure; DBP, diastolic blood pressure; SBP, systolic blood pressure.
From Clinical Practice Guideline for Screening and Management of High Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics. 2017;e20171904; https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-1904.



BLOOD PRESSURE LEVELS FOR THE 50TH, 90TH, 95TH, AND 99TH PERCENTILES OF BLOOD PRESSURE FOR BOYS AGED 1-17 YEARS BY PERCENTILES OF HEIGHT

Age
(years) BP Percentile

SBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height

DBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height




Age
(years) BP Percentile


SBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height


DBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height


5%10%25%50%75%90%95%5%10%25%50%75%90%95%4Height (in)38.839.440.541.742.943.944.538.839.440.541.742.943.944.5Height (cm)98.5100.2102.9105.9108.9111.5113.298.5100.2102.9105.9108.9111.5113.250th909091929394944849495051525290th1021031041051051061076061626263646495th1071071081081091101106364656667676895th + 12 mmHg119119120120121122122757677787979805Height (in)41.141.843.044.345.546.747.441.141.843.044.345.546.747.4Height (cm)104.4106.2109.1112.4115.7118.6120.3104.4106.2109.1112.4115.7118.6120.350th919293949596965151525354555590th1031041051061071081086364656566676795th1071081091091101111126667686970707195th + 12 mmHg119120121121122123124787980818282836Height (in)43.444.245.446.848.249.450.243.444.245.446.848.249.450.2Height (cm)110.3112.2115.3118.9122.4125.6127.5110.3112.2115.3118.9122.4125.6127.550th939394959697985454555657575890th1051051061071091101106666676868696995th1081091101111121131146970707172727395th + 12 mmHg120121122123124125126818282838484857Height (in)45.746.547.849.350.852.152.945.746.547.849.350.852.152.9Height (cm)116.1118121.4125.1128.9132.4134.5116.1118121.4125.1128.9132.4134.550th949495979898995656575858595990th1061071081091101111116868697070717195th1101101111121141151167171727373747495th + 12 mmHg12212212312412612712883838485858686Continued


Age
(years) BP Percentile

SBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height

DBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height


5%10%25%50%75%90%95%5%10%25%50%75%90%95%8Height (in)47.848.65051.653.254.655.547.848.65051.653.254.655.5Height (cm)121.4123.5127131135.1138.8141121.4123.5127131135.1138.814150th9596979899991005757585959606090th1071081091101111121126970707172727395th1111121121141151161177273737475757595th + 12 mmHg123124124126127128129848585868787879Height (in)49.650.55253.755.456.957.949.650.55253.755.456.957.9Height (cm)126128.3132.1136.3140.7144.7147.1126128.3132.1136.3140.7144.7147.150th969798991001011015758596061626290th1071081091101121131147071727374747495th1121121131151161181197474757676777795th + 12 mmHg1241241251271281301318686878888898910Height (in)51.352.253.855.657.459.160.151.352.253.855.657.459.160.1Height (cm)130.2132.7136.7141.3145.9150.1152.7130.2132.7136.7141.3145.9150.1152.750th9798991001011021035960616263636490th1081091111121131151167273747475757695th1121131141161181201217676777778787895th + 12 mmHg1241251261281301321338888898990909011Height (in)535455.757.659.661.362.4535455.757.659.661.362.4Height (cm)134.7137.3141.5146.4151.3155.8158.6134.7137.3141.5146.4151.3155.8158.650th99991011021031041066161626363636390th1101111121141161171187474757575767695th1141141161181201231247778787878787895th + 12 mmHg12612612813013213513689909090909090Continued





Age
(years) BP Percentile

SBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height

DBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height


5%10%25%50%75%90%95%5%10%25%50%75%90%95%12Height (in)55.256.358.160.162.26465.255.256.358.160.162.26465.2Height (cm)140.3143147.5152.7157.9162.6165.5140.3143147.5152.7157.9162.6165.550th1011011021041061081096162626262636390th1131141151171191211227575757575767695th1161171181211241261287878787878797995th + 12 mmHg1281291301331361381409090909090919113Height (in)57.959.16163.165.267.168.357.959.16163.165.267.168.3Height (cm)147150154.9160.3165.7170.5173.4147150154.9160.3165.7170.5173.450th1031041051081101111126160616263646590th1151161181211241261267474747576777795th1191201221251281301317878787880818195th + 12 mmHg1311321341371401421439090909092939314Height (in)60.661.863.865.968.069.870.960.661.863.865.968.069.870.9Height (cm)153.8156.9162167.5172.7177.4180.1153.8156.9162167.5172.7177.4180.150th1051061091111121131136060626465666790th1191201231261271281297474757778798095th1231251271301321331347778798182838495th + 12 mmHg13513713914214414514689909193949596Continued




Age
(years) BP Percentile

SBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height

DBP (mmHg) Height Percentile or Measured Height


5%10%25%50%75%90%95%5%10%25%50%75%90%95%15Height (in)62.663.865.767.869.871.572.562.663.865.767.869.871.572.5Height (cm)159162166.9172.2177.2181.6184.2159162166.9172.2177.2181.6184.250th1081101121131141141146162646566676890th1231241261281291301307576787980818195th1271291311321341351357879818384858595th + 12 mmHg1391411431441461471479091939596979716Height (in)63.864.966.868.870.772.473.463.864.966.870.770.772.473.4Height (cm)162.1165169.6174.6179.5183.8186.4162.1165169.6174.6179.5183.8186.450th1111121141151151161166364666768696990th1261271281291311311327778798081828295th1301311331341351361378081838485868695th + 12 mmHg1421431451461471481499293959697989817Height (in)64.565.567.369.271.172.873.864.565.567.369.271.172.873.8Height (cm)163.8166.5170.9175.8180.7184.9187.5163.8166.5170.9175.8180.7184.9187.550th1141151161171171181186566676869707090th1281291301311321331347879808182828395th1321331341351371381388182848586868795th + 12 mmHg14414514614714915015093949697989899BP, Blood pressure; DBP, diastolic blood pressure; SBP, systolic blood pressure.
From Clinical Practice Guideline for Screening and Management of High Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics. 2017;e20171904; https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-1904.

BOX 7.1
SUMMARY OF ABNORMAL HEART SOUNDS
• Widely split S1: Ebstein anomaly, RBBB
• Widely split and fixed S2: Right ventricular volume overload (e.g., ASD, PAPVR), pressure overload (e.g., PS), electrical delay in RV contraction (e.g., RBBB), early aortic closure (e.g., MR), occasionally heard in normal child
• Narrowly split S2: Pulmonary hypertension, AS, delay in LV contraction (e.g., LBBB), occasionally heard in normal child
• Single S2: Pulmonary hypertension, one semilunar valve (e.g., pulmonary atresia, aortic atresia, truncus arteriosus), P2 not audible (e.g., TGA, TOF, severe PS), severe AS, occasionally heard in normal child
• Paradoxically split S2: Severe AS, LBBB, Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (type B)
• Abnormal intensity of P2: Increased P2 (e.g., pulmonary hypertension), decreased P2 (e.g., severe PS, TOF, TS)
• S3: Occasionally heard in healthy children or adults or may indicate dilated ventricles (e.g., large VSD, CHF)
• S4: Always pathologic, indicative of decreased ventricular compliance
• Ejection click: Heard with stenosis of the semilunar valves, dilated great arter- ies in the setting of pulmonary or systemic HTN, idiopathic dilation of the PA, TOF, persistent truncus arteriosus
• Midsystolic click: Heard at the apex in mitral valve prolapse
• Diastolic opening snap: Rare in children; associated with TS/MS

AS, Aortic stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect; CHF, congestive heart failure; LBBB, left bundle- branch block; LV, left ventricle; MR, mitral regurgitation; MS, mitral stenosis; PA, pulmonary artery; PAPVR, partial anomalous pulmonary venous return; PS, pulmonic stenosis; RBBB, right bundle- branch block; RV, right ventricular; TGA, transposition of the great arteries; TOF, tetralogy of fallot; TS, tricuspid stenosis; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
Modified from Park MK. Pediatric Cardiology for Practitioners. 5th ed. St Louis: Elsevier; 2008:25.

1. Grading of heart murmurs: Intensified by states of higher cardiac output (e.g., anemia, anxiety, fever, exercise).3
a. Grade I: Barely audible
b. Grade II: Murmur softer than heart sounds, but audible
c. Grade III: Murmur moderately loud, equally loud as heart sounds, not accompanied by a thrill
d. Grade IV: Murmur louder than heart sounds, associated with a thrill
e. Grade V: Audible with a stethoscope barely on the chest
f. Grade VI: Audible with a stethoscope off the chest
2. Benign heart murmurs4:
a. Caused by a disturbance of the laminar flow of blood; frequently produced as the diameter of the blood's pathway decreases and velocity increases.
b. Present in >80% of children sometime during childhood, most com- monly beginning at age 3 to 4 years.
c. Accentuated in high-output states, especially with fever and anemia.
d. Normal electrocardiogram (ECG) and radiographic findings.
NOTE: ECG and chest radiograph are not routinely used, nor are they cost-effective screening tools for distinguishing benign from pathologic murmurs.




COMMON INNOCENT HEART MURMURS
Type (Timing)	Description of Murmur	Age Group


Pulmonary ejection
murmur (systolic)

Maximal at LUSB
Early to midsystolic Grade 1-3/6 in intensity Blowing in quality

8-14 years





Venous hum (continuous)


Maximal at right (or left) supraclavicular and infraclavicular areas
Grade 1-3/6 in intensity Inaudible in supine position
Intensity changes with rotation of head and disap- pears with compression of jugular vein


3-6 years


LLSB, Left lower sternal border; LMSB, left middle sternal border; LUSB, left upper sternal border From Park MK. Pediatric Cardiology for Practitioners. 5th ed. St Louis: Elsevier; 2008:36.

3. A murmur is more likely to be pathologic when one or more of the fol- lowing are present: Symptoms (e.g., chest pain, dyspnea with exer- tion, syncope with exertion); cyanosis; a systolic murmur that is loud (grade =3/6), harsh, pansystolic, or long in duration; diastolic murmur; abnormal heart sounds; presence of a click; abnormally strong or weak pulses.3,4
4. Systolic and diastolic heart murmurs (Box 7.2).

A. Basic Electrocardiography Principles
1. Lead placement (Fig. 7.1)
2. ECG complexes
a. P wave: Represents atrial depolarization.
b. QRS complex: Represents ventricular depolarization.
c. T wave: Represents ventricular repolarization.
d. U wave: May follow the T wave and represents late phases of ven- tricular repolarization.
3. Systematic approach for evaluating ECGs (Table 7.4 shows normal ECG parameters):3,5
a. Rate

BOX 7.2
SYSTOLIC AND DIASTOLIC HEART MURMURS
RUSB
Aortic valve stenosis (supravalvular, subvalvular)
Aortic regurgitation
LUSB
Pulmonary valve stenosis Atrial septal defect
Pulmonary ejection murmur, innocent Pulmonary flow murmur of newborn Pulmonary artery stenosis
Aortic stenosis Coarctation of the aorta Patent ductus arteriosus
Partial anomalous pulmonary venous return (PAPVR) Total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR) Pulmonary regurgitation
LLSB
Ventricular septal defect, including atrioventricular septal defect Vibratory innocent murmur (Still's murmur)
HOCM (IHSS)
Tricuspid regurgitation Tetralogy of Fallot Tricuspid stenosis
Apex
Mitral regurgitation
Vibratory innocent murmur (Still's murmur) Mitral valve prolapse
Aortic stenosis HOCM (IHSS)
Mitral stenosis

Murmurs listed by the location at which they are best heard. Diastolic murmurs are in italics. HOCM, Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy; IHSS, idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis;
LLSB, left lower sternal border; LUSB, left upper sternal border; RUSB, right upper sternal border. From Park MK. Pediatric Cardiology for Practitioners. 5th ed. St Louis: Elsevier; 2008:30.

(1) Standardization: Paper speed is 25 mm/sec. One small square
= 1 mm = 0.04 second. One large square = 5 mm = 0.2 second. Amplitude standard: 10 mm = 1 mV.
(2) Calculation: HR (beats/min) = 60 divided by the average R-R inter- val in seconds, or 1500 divided by the R-R interval in millimeters.
b. Rhythm
(1) Sinus rhythm: Every QRS complex is preceded by a P wave, normal PR interval (although PR interval may be prolonged, as in first-degree atrioventricular [AV] block), and normal P-wave axis (upright P in leads I and aVF).



(A) Hexaxial reference system, (B) Horizontal reference system. (Modified from Park
MK, Guntheroth WG. How to Read Pediatric ECGs. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2006:3.)

(2) There is normal respiratory variation of the R-R interval without morphologic changes of the P wave or QRS complex.
c. Axis: The direction of the QRS in leads I and aVF should be observed, the quadrant determined, and comparison made with age- matched normal values (Fig. 7.2 and Table 7.4).
d. Intervals (PR, QRS, QTc)
(1) See Table 7.4 for normal PR and QRS intervals.
(2) The QTc is calculated using the Bazett formula: QTc = QT (sec) measured/vR-R (the average of three measurements taken from the same lead, usually lead II).
(3) The QT interval is measured from the beginning of the QRS com- plex to the end of the T wave. Divide this value by the square root of the preceding R-R interval to obtain the QTc.
(4) Normal values for QTc are:
(a) 0.44 second is the 97th percentile for infants 3 to 4 days old.6
(b) =0.45 second in all males aged >1 week and in prepubes- cent females.
(c) =0.46 second for postpubescent females.
e. P-wave size and shape: A normal P wave should be <0.10 second in
children and <0.08 second in infants, with an amplitude of <0.3 mV (3 mm in height, with normal standardization).
f. R-wave progression: In general, there is a normal increase in R-wave size and a decrease in S-wave size from leads V1 to V6 (with dominant S waves in the right precordial leads and dominant R waves in the left pre-
cordial leads), representing dominance of left ventricular forces. However, newborns and infants have a normal dominance of the right ventricle.
g. Q waves: Normal Q waves are usually <0.04 second in duration and
<25% of the total QRS amplitude. Q waves are <5 mm deep in the left precordial leads and aVF, and =8 mm deep in lead III for children


NORMAL PEDIATRIC ELECTROCARDIOGRAM PARAMETERS


	Lead V1	 	Lead V6	

Heart Rate

PR Interval

QRS Duration

R-Wave Amplitude

S-Wave Amplitude

R-Wave Amplitude S-Wave

R/S

Age

(bpm)	QRS Axisa

(sec)a

(sec)b

(mm)b

(mm)b	R/S Ratio

(mm)b

Amplitude (mm)b Ratio




1-3 weeks	105-180 (145) +30 to +180
(+110)

0.08-0.12
(0.10)

0.05 (0.07)	10.6 (20.8)	4.2 (10.8)	2.9	7.6 (16.4)	3.4 (9.8)	3.3

6-12 months 110-170 (135) +10 to +125
(+60)

0.10-0.14
(0.12)

0.05 (0.07)	9.4 (20.3)	6.4 (18.1)	1.6	12.6 (22.7)	2.1 (7.2)	7.6

4-5 years	65-135 (110)  0 to +110
(+60)

0.11-0.15
(0.13)

0.07 (0.08)	7.6 (16)	11 (22.5)	0.8	15.6 (25)	1.4 (4.7)	11.2

9-11 years	60-110 (85)	-15 to +110
(+60)

0.12-0.17
(0.14)

0.07 (0.09)	5.4 (12.1)	11.9 (25.4)	0.5	16.3 (25.4)	1.0 (3.9)	14.3

>16 years	60-100 (80)	-15 to +110
(+60)

0.12-0.20
(0.15)

0.08 (0.10)	3 (9)	10 (20)	0.3	10 (20)	0.8 (3.7)	12


aNormal range and (mean).
bMean and (98th percentile).
Data from Park MK. Pediatric Cardiology for Practitioners. 5th ed. St Louis: Elsevier; 2008; and Davignon A, et al. Normal ECG standards for infants and children. Pediatr Cardiol. 1979;1:123-131.


















 FIGURE 7.2 
Location of quadrants of the mean QRS axis from leads I and aVF. (From Park MK, Guntheroth WG. How to Read Pediatric ECGs. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2006:17.)

 FIGURE 7.3 
Non-pathologic (non-ischemic) and pathologic (ischemic) ST and T changes. (A) Characteristic non-ischemic ST-segment alteration called J-depression (note that ST slope is upward), B-C. Ischemic or pathologic ST-segment alterations, (B) Downward slope of ST segment, (C) Horizontal segment is sustained. (From Park MK, Guntheroth WG. How to Read Pediatric ECGs. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2006:107.)

h. ST-segment (Fig. 7.3): ST-segment elevation or depression of >1 mm in the limb leads and >2 mm in the precordial leads is consistent with myocardial ischemia or injury. NOTE: J-depression is an upslop- ing of the ST segment and a normal variant.

162	Part II  Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information


NORMAL T-WAVE AXIS
AgeV1, V2AVFI, V5, V6Birth-1 day±+±1-4 days±++4 days to adolescent-++Adolescent to adult++++, T wave positive; -, T wave negative; ±, T wave normally either positive or negative.


RAELAECAE


3mm

> 0.10



> 0.10


V1
 FIGURE 7.4 
Criteria for Atrial Enlargement. CAE, Combined atrial enlargement; LAE, left atrial enlargement; RAE, right atrial enlargement. (From Park MK. Pediatric Cardiology for Practitioners. 5th ed. St Louis: Elsevier; 2008:53.)

i. T wave:
(1) Inverted T waves in V1 and V2 can be normal in children up to adolescence (Table 7.5).
(2) Tall, peaked T waves may be seen in hyperkalemia.
(3) Flat or low T waves may be seen in hypokalemia, hypothyroid- ism, normal newborns, and myocardial/pericardial ischemia and inflammation.
j. Hypertrophy/enlargement
(1) Atrial enlargement (Fig. 7.4).
(2) Ventricular hypertrophy: Diagnosed by QRS axis, voltage, and R/S ratio (Box 7.3; see also Table 7.6).
B. ECG Abnormalities
1. Nonventricular arrhythmias (Table 7.6; Fig. 7.5)7
2. Ventricular arrhythmias (Table 7.7; Fig. 7.6)
3. Nonventricular conduction disturbances (Table 7.8; Fig. 7.7)8
4. Ventricular conduction disturbances (Table 7.9)



















C. ECG Findings Secondary to Electrolyte Disturbances, Medications, and Systemic Illnesses (Table 7.10)7,9
D. Long QT
1. Diagnosis:
a. In general, QTc is similar in males and females from birth until late adolescence (0.37 to 0.44 second).
b. In adults, prolonged QTc is generally >0.45 second.
c. In ~10% of cases, patients may have a normal QTc. Patients may also have a family history of long QT associated with unexplained syncope, seizure, or cardiac arrest, without prolongation of QTc on ECG.
d. Treadmill exercise testing may prolong the QTc and will sometimes induce arrhythmias.
2. Complications: Associated with ventricular arrhythmias (torsades de pointes), syncope, and sudden death.
3. Management:
a. Congenital long QT: ß-blockers and/or defibrillators; rarely requires cardiac sympathetic denervation or cardiac pacemakers.
b. Acquired long QT: Treatment of arrhythmias, discontinuation of precipitating drugs, and correction of metabolic abnormalities.
E. Hyperkalemia:
ECG changes dependent on the serum potassium (K+) level; however, the ECG may be normal with serum K+ levels between 2.5 and 6 mEq/L.
1. Serum K+ <2.5 mEq/L: Depressed ST segment, biphasic T wave.
2. Serum K+ >6 mEq/L: Tall T wave.



NONVENTRICULAR ARRHYTHMIAS
Name/Description	Cause	Treatment



Normal sinus rhythm with HR >95th percentile for age (usually infants:
<220 beats/min and children: <180 beats/min)


Hypovolemia, shock, anemia, sepsis, fever, anxiety, CHF, PE, myocardial disease, drugs (e.g., ß- agonists, albuterol, caffeine, atropine)


Address underlying cause



Normal sinus rhythm with HR <5th percentile for age	Normal (especially in athletic individuals),
increased ICP, hypoxia, hyperkalemia, hyper- calcemia, vagal stimulation, hypothyroidism, hypothermia, drugs (e.g., opioids, digoxin,
ß-blockers), long QT

Address underlying cause; if symptomatic, refer to inside back cover for bradycardia algorithm





Narrow QRS complex; ectopic focus in atria with abnormal P-wave morphology

Digitalis toxicity, medications (e.g., caffeine, the- ophylline, sympathomimetics), normal variant

Treat digitalis toxicity; otherwise no treatment needed


Atrial rate 250-350 beats/min; characteristic saw-tooth or flutter pat- tern with variable ventricular response rate and normal QRS complex


Dilated atria, previous intra-atrial surgery, valvular or ischemic heart disease, idiopathic in newborns


Synchronized cardioversion or overdrive pacing; treat underlying cause


Irregular; atrial rate 350-600 beats/min, yielding characteristic fibrilla- tory pattern (no discrete P waves) and irregular ventricular response rate of about 110-150 beats/min with normal QRS complex


Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome and those listed previously for atrial flutter (except idiopathic), alcohol exposure, familial


Synchronized cardioversion; then may need anticoagu- lation based on stroke risk


Continued



TABLE 7.6-CONT'DName/DescriptionCauseTreatmentSVTSudden run of three or more consecutive premature supraventricularMost commonly idiopathic but may be seen inVagal maneuvers, adenosine; if unstable, needbeats at >220 beats/min (infant) or >180 beats/min (child), withcongenital heart disease (e.g., Ebstein anomaly,immediate synchronized cardioversion (0.5 J/kg upnarrow QRS complex and absent/abnormal P wave; either sustainedtransposition)to 1 J/kg); consult cardiologist; refer to the back of(>30 sec) or non-sustainedthe book for tachycardia with poor perfusion andtachycardia with adequate perfusion algorithmsI. AV Reentrant: Presence of accessory bypass pathway, in conjunction with AV node, establishes cyclic pattern of reentry independent of SAnode; most common cause of non-sinus tachycardia in children (see
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, Table 7.9)
II. Junctional: Automatic focus; simultaneous depolarization of atria and ventricles yields invisible P wave or retrograde P wave

Cardiac surgery, idiopathic	Adjust for clinical situation; consult cardiology


NODAL ESCAPE/JUNCTIONAL RHYTHM
Abnormal rhythm driven by AV node impulse, giving normal QRS complex and invisible P wave (buried in preceding QRS or T wave) or retrograde P wave (negative in lead II, positive in aVR); seen in sinus bradycardia



Common after surgery of atria	Often requires no treatment; if rate is slow enough, may require pacemaker

aAbnormal rhythm resulting from ectopic focus in atria or AV node, or from accessory conduction pathways. Characterized by different P-wave shape and abnormal P-wave axis. QRS morphology usually normal. See Fig. 7.5.6
AV, Atrioventricular; CHF, congestive heart failure; HR, heart rate; ICP, intracranial pressure; PE, pulmonary embolism; SA, sinoatrial; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia.



Supraventricular Arrhythmias. p1, Premature atrial contraction. (From Park MK,
Guntheroth WG. How to Read Pediatric ECGs. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2006:129.)



VENTRICULAR ARRHYTHMIAS
Name/Description	Cause	Treatment


Ectopic ventricular focus causing
early depolarization. Abnormally wide QRS complex appears prematurely, usually with full compensatory pause. May be unifocal or multifocal
Bigeminy: Alternating normal and abnormal QRS complexes.
Trigeminy: Two normal QRS com- plexes followed by an abnormal one
Couplet: Two consecutive PVCs

Myocarditis, myocardial injury,
cardiomyopathy, long QT, congenital and acquired heart disease, drugs (catecholamines, theophyl- line, caffeine, anesthetics), MVP, anxiety, hypokalemia, hypoxia, hypomagnesemia; can be normal variant

None; more worrisome if
associated with underly- ing heart disease or syncope, if worse with activity, or if they are multiform (especially cou- plets); address underlying cause; rule out structural heart disease

VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIASeries of three or more PVCs at rapidSee causes of PVCs (70% haveRefer to front of book forrate (120-250 beats/min), withunderlying cause)tachycardia with poorwide QRS complex and dissociated,perfusion and tachycardiaretrograde, or no P wavewith adequate perfusionalgorithmsVENTRICULAR FIBRILLATIONDepolarization of ventricles in unco-Myocarditis, MI, postoperativeRequires immediate defibril-ordinated asynchronous pattern,state, digitalis or quinidinelation; refer to front ofyielding abnormal QRS complexestoxicity, catecholamines,book for asystole andof varying size and morphologysevere hypoxia, electrolytepulseless arrest algorithmwith irregular, rapid rate; rare indisturbances, long QTchildren.MI, Myocardial infarction; MVP, mitral valve prolapse.

Chapter 7 Cardiology	167


Ventricular Arrhythmias. p, P wave; PVC, premature ventricular contraction; RR, R-R interval. (From Park MK, Guntheroth WG. How to Read Pediatric ECGs. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2006:138.)



NONVENTRICULAR CONDUCTION DISTURBANCES
Name/Descriptiona	Cause	Treatment


Abnormal but asymptomatic
delay in conduction through AV node, yielding prolongation of PR interval

Acute rheumatic fever, tick-borne (e.g.,
Lyme) disease, connective tissue disease, congenital heart disease, cardiomyopathy, digitalis toxicity, postoperative state, normal children

No specific treatment
except to address the underlying cause



Progressive lengthening of PR interval until a QRS complex is not conducted; common finding in asymptomatic teenagers

Myocarditis, cardiomyopathy, congenital heart disease, postoperative state, MI, toxicity (digitalis, ß-blocker), normal children, Lyme disease, lupus

Address underlying cause, or none needed



Loss of conduction to ventricle without lengthening of the PR interval; may progress to complete heart block

Same as for Mobitz type I	Address underlying cause; may need pacemaker



Complete dissociation of atrial and ventricular conduction, with atrial rate faster than ventricular rate; P wave and PP interval regular; RR interval regular and much slower

Congenital due to maternal lupus or other connective tissue disease

If bradycardic and symptomatic, consider pacing; refer to back of the book for bradycardia algorithm


aHigh-degree AV block: Conduction of atrial impulse at regular intervals, yielding 2:1 block (two atrial impulses for each ventricular response), 3:1 block, etc.




Conduction Blocks. p, P wave; R, QRS complex. (From Park MK, Guntheroth WG. How to Read Pediatric ECGs. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2006:141.)


VENTRICULAR CONDUCTION DISTURBANCES
Name/Description	Criteria	Causes/Treatment


Delayed right bundle conduction
prolongs RV depolarization time, leading to wide QRS
1. 
Prolonged or wide QRS with
terminal slurred R' (m-shaped RSR' or RR') in V1, V2, aVR
2. Wide and slurred S wave in leads I and V6

ASD, surgery with right
ventriculotomy, occasionally seen in normal children



Delayed left bundle conduction pro- longs septal and LV depolarization time, leading to wide QRS with loss of usual septal signal; there is still a predominance of left ventricle forces; rare in children.
1. 
Wide negative QRS complex in lead V1 with loss of septal R wave
2. Wide R or RR' complex in lead
V6 with loss of septal Q wave

Hypertension, ischemic or valvular heart disease, cardiomyopathy



Atrial impulse transmitted via anomalous conduction pathway to ventricles, bypassing AV node and normal ventricular
conduction system; leads to early and prolonged depolarization of ventricles; bypass pathway is a predisposing condition for SVT
1. 
Shortened PR interval
2. Delta wave
3. Wide QRS

Acute management of SVT if necessary, as previously described; consider ablation of accessory pathway
if recurrent SVT; all patients need cardiology referral


ASD, Atrial septal defect; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia.





SYSTEMIC EFFECTS ON ELECTROCARDIOGRAM

Short QT Long QT-U	Prolonged QRS  ST-T Changes


Sinus Tachycardia


Sinus
Bradycardia	AV Block


Ventricular
Tachycardia	Miscellaneous


Hyperkalemia	X	X	X	X	Low-voltage P waves; peaked T waves

Hypercalcemia	X	X	X	X

Hypermagnesemia	X
DRUGS

Phenothiazines	T	T
Propranolol	X	X	X

Verapamil	X	X
MISCELLANEOUS
CNS injury	X	X	X	X	X








Short QT Long QT-U	Prolonged QRS  ST-T Changes

Sinus Tachycardia

Sinus
Bradycardia	AV Block

Ventricular
Tachycardia	Miscellaneous



Duchenne muscular dystrophy

X	X	Atrial flutter


Collagen vascular disease


X	X	X


Hyperthyroidism	X	X	X	X
Holt-Oram, maternal	X
lupus
CNS, Central nervous system; T, present only with drug toxicity; X, present.
Data from Garson A Jr. The Electrocardiogram in Infants and Children: A Systematic Approach. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 1983:172; and Walsh EP. Cardiac arrhythmias. In: Fyler DC, Nadas A, eds. Pediatric Cardiology. Philadelphia: Hanley & Belfus; 1992:141-143.

Chapter 7 Cardiology	171


MAJOR SYNDROMES ASSOCIATED WITH CARDIAC DEFECTS
Syndrome	Dominant Cardiac Defect

DiGeorge	Aortic arch anomalies, TOF, truncus arteriosus, VSD, PDA
Marfan	Aortic root dilation, mitral valve prolapse

Noonan	Supravalvular pulmonic stenosis, LVH
Williams	Supravalvular aortic stenosis, pulmonary artery stenosis

IDM	TGA, VSD, COA, cardiomyopathy
VCFS	Truncus arteriosus, TOF, pulmonary atresia with VSD, TGA, interrupted aortic arch
ASD, Atrial septal defect; CHARGE, a syndrome of associated defects including Coloboma of the eye, Heart anomaly, choanal Atresia, Retardation, and Genital and Ear anomalies; COA, coarctation of aorta; FAS, fetal alcohol syndrome; IDM, infant of diabetic mother; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; TGA, transposition of the great arteries; TOF, tetralogy of Fallot; VATER/VACTERL, association of Vertebral anomalies, Anal atresia, Cardiac anomalies, Tracheoesophageal fistula, Renal/radial anomalies, Limb defects; VCFS, velocardiofacial syndrome; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
From Park MK. Pediatric Cardiology for Practitioners. 5th ed. St Louis: Elsevier; 2008:10-12.

3. Serum K+ >7.5 mEq/L: Long PR interval, wide QRS, tall T wave.
4. Serum K+ >9 mEq/L: Absent P wave, sinusoidal.

A. Pulse Oximetry Screening for Critical Congenital Heart Disease
1. To be done as late as possible, but before discharge from nursery, preferably >24 hours of life, due to decreased false-positive rate. Recommended to use the right hand and 1 foot, either in parallel or direct sequence.
2. The screening result would be considered positive if:
a. Any oxygen saturation measure <90%.
b. Oxygen saturation <95% in both extremities on three measures, each separated by 1 hour.
c. There is a >3% absolute difference in oxygen saturation between the right hand and foot on three measures, each separated by 1 hour.
B. Common Syndromes Associated with Cardiac Lesions (Table 7.11)
C. Acyanotic Lesions (Table 7.12)
D. Cyanotic Lesions (Table 7.13)
A hyperoxia test is used to evaluate the etiology of cyanosis in neonates. A baseline arterial blood gas (ABG) with saturation at Fio2 = 0.21 is obtained. Then the infant is placed in an oxygen hood at Fio2 = 1 for a minimum of





ACYANOTIC CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
Lesion Type	Examination Findings	ECG Findings	Chest Radiograph Findings


Atrial septal defect
(ASD)

Wide, fixed split S2 with grade 2-3/6 SEM at the LUSB
May have mid-diastolic rumble at LLSB

Small ASD: Normal
Large ASD: RAD and mild RVH or RBBB with RSR' in V1

May show cardiomegaly with
increased PVMs if hemodynami- cally significant ASD



Atrioventricular septal
defects

Most occur in Down syndrome
Hyperactive precordium with systolic thrill at LLSB and loud S2 ± grade 3-4/6 holosystolic regurgitant murmur along LLSB ± systolic murmur of MR at apex ± mid-diastolic rumble at LLSB or at apex ± gallop rhythm

Superior QRS axis
RVH and LVH may be present

Cardiomegaly with increased
PVMs


Continued







Lesion Type	Examination Findings	ECG Findings	Chest Radiograph Findings

Aortic stenosis (AS)	Systolic thrill at RUSB, suprasternal notch, or over carotids Ejection click that does not vary with respiration if valvular AS
Harsh SEM (2-4/6) at second RICS or third LICS, with radiation to neck and apex ± early diastolic decrescendo murmur due to AR
Narrow pulse pressure, if severe stenosis

Mild AS: Normal
Moderate-severe AS: LVH ± strain

Usually normal

Coarctation of aorta may present as:
1. Infant in CHF
2. Child with HTN
3. Child with murmur

Male/female ratio of 2:1
2-3/6 SEM at LUSB, radiating to left interscapular area
Bicuspid valve is often associated, so may have systolic ejection click at apex and RUSB
BP in lower extremities will be lower than in upper extremities
Pulse oximetry discrepancy of >5% between upper and lower extremities is also suggestive of coarctation

In infancy: RVH or RBBB
In older children: LVH

Marked cardiomegaly and pulmo- nary venous congestion
Rib notching from collateral circulation usually not seen in children younger than 5 years because collaterals not yet established

AR, Aortic regurgitation; ASD, atrial septal defect; BP, blood pressure; BVH, biventricular hypertrophy; CDG, congenital disorders of glycosylation; CHD, congenital heart disease; CHF, congestive heart failure; HTN, hypertension; LAE, left atrial enlargement; LICS, left intercostal space; LLSB, left lower sternal border; LUSB, left upper sternal border; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; MR, mitral regurgitation; PVM, pulmonary vascular markings; RAD, right axis deviation; RAE, right atrial enlargement; RBBB, right bundle-branch block; RICS, right intercostal space; RUSB, right upper sternal border; RVH, right ventricular hypertrophy; SEM, systolic ejection murmur; VLBW, very low birth weight (i.e., <1500 g); VSD, ventricular septal defect.






CYANOTIC CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
Lesion	Examination Findings	ECG Findings	Chest Radiograph Findings
Tetralogy of Fallot:	Loud SEM at LMSB and LUSB and a loud, RAD and RVH	Boot-shaped heart with normal

1. Large VSD
2. RVOT obstruction
3. RVH
4. Overriding aorta
Degree of RVOT obstruction will determine whether there is clinical cyanosis; if PS is mild, there will be a left-to-right shunt, and child will be acyanotic; increased obstruction leads to increased right-to-left shunting across VSD, and child will be cyanotic

single S2 ± thrill at LMSB and LLSB
Tet spells: Occur in young infants; as RVOT obstruction increases or sys- temic resistance decreases, right-to- left shunting across VSD occurs; may present with tachypnea, increasing cyanosis, and decreasing murmur

heart size ± decreased PVMs

Transposition of great arteries	Nonspecific; extreme cyanosis; loud, single S2; no murmur unless there is associated VSD or PS

RAD and RVH (due to RV acting as systemic ventricle); after 3 days of age, upright T wave in V1 may be only abnormality

Classic finding:
"egg on a string" with cardiomeg- aly; possible increased PVMs.

Tricuspid atresia (absent tricuspid valve and hypoplastic RV and PA; must have ASD, PDA, or VSD to survive)

Single S2 + grade 2-3/6 systolic regurgitation murmur at LLSB if VSD is present. Occasional PDA murmur.

Superior QRS axis; RAE or CAE and LVH.  Normal or slightly enlarged
heart size; may have boot- shaped heart.

Continued







Lesion	Examination Findings	ECG Findings	Chest Radiograph Findings

Total anomalous pulmonary venous return:
Instead of draining into LA, pulmonary veins drain into the following locations (must have ASD or PFO for survival):
Supracardiac (most common): SVC
Cardiac: Coronary sinus or RA
Subdiaphragmatic: IVC, portal vein, ductus venosus, or hepatic vein
Mixed type

Hyperactive RV impulse, quadruple rhythm, S2 fixed and widely split, 2-3/6 SEM at LUSB, and mid-diastolic rumble at LLSB

RAD, RVH (RSR' in V1); may see RAE	Cardiomegaly and increased
PVMs; classic finding is "snowman in a snowstorm," but this is rarely seen until after age 4 months


Cyanotic CHDs that each occur at a frequency of <1% include pulmonary atresia, Ebstein anomaly, truncus arteriosus, single ventricle, and double outlet right ventricle

ASD, Atrial septal defect; CAE, common atrial enlargement; ECG, electrocardiogram; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LLSB, left lower sternal border; LMSB, left midsternal border; LUSB, left upper sternal border; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; PA, pulmonary artery; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PFO, patent foramen ovale; PVM, pulmonary vascular markings; PS, pulmonary stenosis; RA, right atrium; RAD, right-axis deviation; RAE, right atrial enlargement; RV, right ventricle; RVH, right ventricular hypertrophy; RVOT, right ventricular outflow tract; SEM, systolic ejection murmur; SVC, superior vena cava; VSD, ventricular septal defect.

176	Part II  Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information

10 minutes, and the ABG is repeated. In cardiac disease, there will not be a significant change in Pao2 following the oxygen challenge test. A Pao2 of
>200 after exposure to Fio2 of 1.0 is considered normal, and >150 indi-
cates pulmonary rather than cardiac disease. Note: Pulse oximetry is not useful for following changes in oxygenation once saturation has reached 100% (approximately a Pao2 of >90 mmHg).12-17 See Table EC 7.A for interpretation of oxygen challenge test (hyperoxia test).

 IV. ACQUIRED HEART DISEASE	
A. Myocardial Infarction (MI) in Children (Box 7.4; Fig. 7.8)
B. Endocarditis
1. Common causative organisms: Approximately 70% of endocardi- tis is caused by streptococcal species (Streptococcus viridans, enterococci), 20% by staphylococcal species (Staphylococcus
aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis), and 10% by other organisms (Haemophilus influenzae, gram-negative bacteria, fungi).
2. Presentation: Heart murmur, recurrent fever, splenomegaly, petechiae, fatigue, Osler nodes (tender nodules at the fingertips), Janeway lesions (painless hemorrhagic areas on the palms or soles), splinter hemor- rhages, Roth spots (retinal hemorrhages).
3. Diagnosis-Duke's Criteria:
a. Pathologic criteria:
(1) Direct evidence of endocarditis based upon histologic findings.
(2) Gram stain positive or cultures of specimens.
b. Clinical criteria: 1 major criterion and 1 minor OR 3 minor criteria:
(1) Major: Persistently positive blood cultures (2 sets 1 hour apart), positive echocardiogram for vegetations, new regurgitant mur- mur, single positive blood culture for Coxiella burnetii.
(2) Minor: Fever, predisposing valvular condition (prosthetic heart valve, valve lesion OR intravenous drug user [IVDU]), vascular phenomenon (e.g., emboli), immunologic phenomenon (e.g., Roth's spots, Osler's nodes), positive blood cultures that do not meet major criteria.
4. Management: Daily blood cultures while febrile; support heart failure symptoms with diuretics, digoxin, etc.
C. Bacterial Endocarditis Prophylaxis
See Box 7.5 for cardiac conditions that meet criteria for prophylaxis.18
1. All dental procedures that involve treatment of gingival tissue, the peri- apical region of the teeth, or oral mucosal perforation.
2. Invasive procedures that involve incision or biopsy of respiratory mucosa, such as tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy.
3. Not recommended for genitourinary or gastrointestinal tract procedures; solely for bacterial endocarditis prevention.
4. Treatment: Amoxicillin is preferred PO; ampicillin if unable to take PO; cephalexin if allergic to penicillins.28





INTERPRETATION OF OXYGEN CHALLENGE TEST (HYPEROXIA TEST)

ConditionFiO2 = 0.21
PaO2 (% Saturation)FiO2 = 1.00
PaO2 (% Saturation)
PaCO2Normal70 (95)>200 (100)35Pulmonary disease50 (85)>150 (100)50Neurologic disease50 (85)>150 (100)50Methemoglobinemia70 (85)>200 (85)35Cardiac disease•Separate circulationa<40 (<75)<50 (<85)35•Restricted PBFb<40 (<75)<50 (<85)35•Complete mixing without restricted PBFc50 (85)<150 (<100)35Persistent pulmonary hypertensionPreductalPostductalPFO (no R to L shunt)70 (95)<40 (<75)Variable35-50PFO (with R to L shunt)<40 (<75)<40 (<75)Variable35-50aD-Transposition of the great arteries (D-TGA) with intact ventricular septum.
bTricuspid atresia with pulmonary stenosis or atresia, pulmonary atresia or critical pulmonary stenosis with intact ventricular septum, or tetralogy of Fallot.
cTruncus arteriosus, total anomalous pulmonary venous return, single ventricle, hypoplastic left heart syndrome, D-TGA with ventricular septal defect, tricuspid atresia without pulmonary stenosis or atresia.
FiO2, Fraction of inspired oxygen; PBF, pulmonary blood flow; PFO, patent foramen ovale.
From Lees MH. Cyanosis of the newborn infant: recognition and clinical evaluation. J Pediatr. 1970;77:484; Kitterman JA. Cyanosis in the newborn infant. Pediatr Rev. 1982;4:13; and Jones RW, Baumer JH, Joseph MC, et al. Arterial oxygen tension and response to oxygen breathing in differential diagnosis of heart disease in infancy. Arch Dis Child. 1976;51:667-673.


BOX 7.4MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION IN CHILDREN25,26Etiologies	Diagnosis
Anomalous origin of coronary artery	ECG findings10,11: See Fig. 7.12Kawasaki disease	BiomarkersCongenital heart disease	Troponin I, CK-MB nonspecific for ischemicDilated cardiomyopathy	injury in childrenSevere hypertensionSLEMyocarditisDrug ingestion (cocaine, adrenergic drugs)CK-MB, Creatine kinase-MB; ECG, electrocardiogram; MI, myocardial Infarction; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.

 FIGURE 7.8 
Sequential Changes During Myocardial Infarction. (From Park MK, Guntheroth WG.
How to Read Pediatric ECGs. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2006:115.)

D. Myocardial Disease
1. Dilated cardiomyopathy: End result of myocardial damage leading to atrial and ventricular dilation with decreased systolic contractile function of the ventricles.
a. Treatment: Management of congestive heart failure (CHF) (digoxin, diuretics, vasodilation, angiotensin-converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitors).
b. Anticoagulants should be considered to decrease the risk of throm- bus formation. Cardiac transplant may eventually be required.



Data from Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al. Prevention of infective endocarditis: Guidelines from the American Heart Association: A guideline from the American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, and the Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and the Quality of Care and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary Working Group. Circulation.
2007;116(15):1736-1754.


2. Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM): Abnormality of myocardial cells leading to significant ventricular hypertrophy (usually left ventricle) with small to normal ventricular dimensions. Increased contractile function, impaired filling secondary to stiff ventricles. Most common type is asymmetrical septal hypertrophy with (HOCM) or with- out left ventricular outflow obstruction. There is a 4% to 6% incidence of sudden death in children and adolescents.
a. Treatment: Moderate restriction of physical activity, negative inotro- pes (ß-blocker, calcium channel blocker) to help improve filling, and maintenance of adequate hydration. If at increased risk for sudden death, may consider implantable defibrillator. If symptomatic with subaortic obstruction, may benefit from myectomy.
b. Additional management: HOCM is a preload dependent lesion and, therefore, patient may benefit from higher rates of fluid administra- tion. Avoid inotropes, tachycardia, and afterload reduction.
3. Restrictive cardiomyopathy: Myocardial or endocardial disease (usually infiltrative or fibrotic) resulting in stiff ventricular walls with restric-
tion of diastolic filling but normal contractile function. Results in atrial enlargement. Associated with a high mortality rate. Very rare in children. Treatment is supportive with diuretics, anticoagulants, calcium channel blockers, a pacemaker for heart block, and cardiac transplantation, if severe.
4. Myocarditis: Inflammation of myocardial tissue
a. Etiology:
(1) Infectious: viral (coxsackie virus, echovirus, adenovirus), bacte- rial, rickettsial, fungal, parasitic
(2) Other: immune-mediated disease (Kawasaki disease, acute rheumatic fever), collagen vascular disease, toxin-induced

b. Presentation: Symptoms can be nonspecific, including fatigue, short- ness of breath, emesis. Exam includes signs of CHF, soft systolic murmur, arrhythmia.
c. Testing:
(1) Imaging: ECG: Low QRS voltages throughout (<5 mm), ST- segment and T-wave changes (e.g., decreased T-wave ampli- tude), prolongation of QT interval, arrhythmias (especially premature contractions, first- or second-degree AV block); echo shows enlarged chambers and impaired LV function
(2) Labs: CK, troponin
d. Treatment: Bed rest, diuretics, inotropes (dopamine, dobutamine, milrinone), digoxin, gamma globulin, ACE inhibitors, possibly steroids.
e. May require ventricular assist device and/or heart transplantation (˜20% to 25% of cases).
E. Pericardial Disease
1. Pericarditis: Inflammation of visceral and parietal layers of pericardium. It is often self-limited.
a. Presentation: Chest pain (often pleuritic in nature), fever, tachycar- dia, distant heart sounds, friction rub.
b. EKG: Diffuse ST-segment elevation in almost all leads (representing inflammation of adjacent myocardium); PR-segment depression.
c. Treatment: Address underlying condition and provide symptomatic treatment with rest, analgesia, and anti-inflammatory drugs.
2. Pericardial effusion: Accumulation of excess fluid in pericardial sac.
a. Etiology: Acute pericarditis, serous effusion from increased hydro- static pressure (CHF), decreased plasma oncotic pressure, increased capillary permeability.
b. Presentation: Can be asymptomatic, chest or abdominal pain, muffled heart sounds, dullness to percussion, vital sign instability from cardiac compression (e.g., hypotension).
c. EKG: Decreased QRS voltage, electrical alternans.
d. Treatment: Address underlying condition. Observe if asymptom- atic; use pericardiocentesis if there is sudden increase in volume or hemodynamic compromise. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or steroids may be of benefit, depending on etiology.
3. Cardiac tamponade: Accumulation of pericardial fluid under high pres- sure causing compression of cardiac chambers, limiting filling, and decreasing stroke volume and cardiac output.
a. Etiology: Same as pericardial effusion.
b. Presentation: Dyspnea, fatigue, signs of CHF (jugular venous disten- sion, hepatomegaly, edema, tachypnea/rales), pulsus paradoxus.
c. EKG: Same as pericardial effusion.
d. Echocardiogram: RV collapse in early diastole, RA/LA collapse in end diastole and early systole.

e. Treatment is pericardiocentesis with temporary catheter left in place if necessary; pericardial window or stripping, if it is a recurrent condition.
F. Kawasaki Disease19
Acute febrile vasculitis of unknown etiology, which is common in children aged <8 years and is the leading cause of acquired childhood heart dis- ease in developed countries.
1. Etiology: Unknown; thought to be immune regulated in response to infectious agents or environmental toxins.
2. Diagnosis:
a. Typical Kawasaki disease: Based on clinical criteria. These include high fever lasting 5 days or more, plus at least four of the following five criteria:
(1) Bilateral, painless, bulbar conjunctival injection without exudate
(2) Erythematous mouth and pharynx, strawberry tongue, or red cracked lips
(3) Polymorphous exanthem (may be morbilliform, maculopapular, or scarlatiniform)
(4) Swelling of hands and feet with erythema of palms and soles
(5) Cervical lymphadenopathy (>1.5 cm in diameter), usually single and unilateral
b. Atypical/incomplete Kawasaki disease: A suspicion of Kawasaki disease but with fewer of the criteria required for diagnosis. Even without all criteria, there is a risk for coronary artery abnormalities.
(1) More often seen in infants. Echocardiography should be con- sidered in any infant <6 months with fever >7 days duration, laboratory evidence of systemic inflammation (CRP >3 and/or ESR >40), and no other explanation for the febrile illness.
(2) See Fig. 7.9 for evaluation of incomplete Kawasaki disease.
(3) Supplemental laboratory criteria: Albumin =3.0 g/dL, anemia for age, elevation of alanine aminotransferase, platelets after 7 days =450,000/mm3, white blood cell count =15,000/mm3, and urine white blood cells/hpf =10 (non-catheterized specimen).
3. Other clinical findings: Often associated with extreme irritability, abdomi- nal pain, diarrhea, vomiting. Also seen are arthritis and arthralgia, hepatic enlargement, jaundice, acute acalculous distention of the gallbladder, carditis.
4. Laboratory findings: Leukocytosis with left shift, neutrophils with vacu- oles or toxic granules, elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) or erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (seen acutely), thrombocytosis, normocytic and normochromic anemia, sterile pyuria (33%), increased transami- nases (40%), hyperbilirubinemia (10%).
5. Subacute phase (11 to 25 days after onset of illness): Resolution of fever, rash, and lymphadenopathy. Often, desquamation of the fingertips or toes and thrombocytosis occur. Cardiovascular

complications: If untreated, 20% to 25% develop coronary artery aneurysms and dilation in subacute phase (peak prevalence occurs about 2 to 4 weeks after onset of disease; rarely appears after 6 weeks) and are at risk for coronary thrombosis acutely and coronary stenosis chronically. Carditis; aortic, mitral, and tricuspid regurgita- tion; pericardial effusion; CHF; MI; left ventricular dysfunction; and ECG changes may also occur.
6. Convalescent phase: ESR, CRP, and platelet count return to normal. Those with coronary artery abnormalities are at increased risk for MI, arrhythmias, and sudden death.
7. Management (see also Table EC 7.B)19


 FIGURE 7.9 
Evaluation of Incomplete Kawasaki Disease. (From Diagnosis, Treatment, and Long- Term Management of Kawasaki Disease: A Scientific Statement for Health Professionals from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2017; Mar 29.)

a. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG)
(1) Shown to reduce incidence of coronary artery dilation to <3% and decrease duration of fever, if given in the first 10 days of illness. Current recommended regimen is a single dose of IVIG, 2 g/kg over 10 to 12 hours.19
(2) Can be given to children after 10th day of fever if ESR or CRP elevated with persistent fever.
(3) Approximately 10% of patients treated with IVIG fail to respond (persistent or recurrent fever =36 hours after IVIG completion).
Retreat with second dose.19
b. Aspirin is recommended for both its anti-inflammatory and antiplate- let effects. In the United States, high-dose aspirin (80 to 100 mg/ kg/day divided in four doses) is recommended 48 to 72 hours after defervescence. This is given with IVIG. Low-dose aspirin (3 to 5 mg/ kg/day as a single daily dose) is continued for 6 to 8 weeks or until platelet count and ESR are normal (if there are no coronary artery abnormalities). Aspirin may be continued indefinitely, if coronary artery abnormalities persist.19
c. Dipyridamole is sometimes used as an alternative to aspirin, particu- larly if symptoms of influenza or varicella arise while on aspirin (due to concern for Reye syndrome).
d. Follow-up: Serial echocardiography is recommended to assess coronary arteries and left ventricular function (at time of diagnosis, at 2 weeks,
at 6 to 8 weeks, and at 12 months [optional]). More frequent intervals and long-term follow-up are recommended if abnormalities are seen on echocardiography. Cardiac catheterization may be necessary.
e. Follow up with Cardiology depending on presence of coronary aneu- rysms and Z score of aneurysm (see Table EC 7.B).
G. Rheumatic Heart Disease
1. Etiology: Believed to be an immunologically-mediated, delayed sequela of group A streptococcal pharyngitis.
2. Clinical findings: History of streptococcal pharyngitis 1 to 5 weeks before onset of symptoms. Often with pallor, malaise, easy fatigability.
3. Diagnosis: Jones criteria (Box 7.6).
4. Management: Penicillin, bed rest, salicylates, supportive management of CHF (if present) with diuretics, digoxin, morphine.

 V. IMAGING	
A. Chest Radiograph (Fig. 7.10)
B. Echocardiography (Table EC 7.C)

 VI. PROCEDURES	
A. Cardiac Surgery (Fig. 7.11, Table 7.14)
B. Cardiac Catheterization13,14
1. Performed in pediatric patients for diagnostic and interventional pur-




GUIDELINES FOR TREATMENT AND FOLLOW-UP OF CHILDREN WITH KAWASAKI DISEASE
Risk LevelPharmacologic TherapyPhysical ActivityFollow-Up and Diagnostic TestingInvasive TestingI. No coronary artery changes atNone beyond initial 6-8 weeksNo restrictions beyond initial 6-8Counsel on cardiovascular riskNone recommendedany stage of illnessweeksfactors every 5 yearsII. Transient coronary artery ectasiaNone beyond initial 6-8 weeksNo restrictions beyond initial 6-8Counsel on cardiovascular riskNone recommendedthat resolves by 8 weeks afterweeksfactors every 3-5 yearsdisease onsetIII. Small-to-medium solitary3-5 mg/kg/day aspirin, at leastFor patients in first decade of life, noAnnual follow-up with echocardio-Angiography, if stress testing orcoronary artery aneurysmuntil aneurysm resolvesrestriction beyond initial 6-8 weeks;gram and electrocardiogramechocardiography suggestsduring the second decade of life,stenosisphysical activity guided by stresstesting every 2 years; avoid com-petitive contact and high-impactsports while on antiplatelet therapyIV. One or more large, >6 mm,Long-term aspirin (3-5 mg/kg/Annual stress testing guides physicalEchocardiogram and electrocardio-Cardiac catheterization 6-12aneurysms and coronary arteriesday) and warfarin or LMWH foractivity; avoid competitive contactgram at 6-month intervals, annualmonths after acute illness withwith multiple small-to-mediumpatients with giant aneurysmsand high-impact sports while onstress testing, atherosclerosis riskadditional testing if ischemiaaneurysms, without obstructionanticoagulant therapyfactor counseling at each visitnoted or testing inconclusiveV. Coronary artery obstructionLong-term aspirin (3-5 mg/Contact sports, isometrics, and weightEchocardiogram and electrocar-Cardiac catheterization 6-12kg/day); warfarin or LMWHtraining should be avoided; otherdiogram at 6-month intervals,months after acute illness toif giant aneurysm persists;physical activity recommendationsannual Holter and stress testingaid in selecting therapeuticconsider use of ß-blockers toguided by outcome of stress testingoptions, additional testing ifreduce myocardial workor myocardial perfusion scanischemia notedLMWH, Low molecular weight heparin.


NOTE: If supported by evidence of preceding group A streptococcal infection, the presence of two major manifestations or of one major and two minor manifestations indicates a high probability of acute rheumatic fever.


abnormal vessels, dilation of atretic valves and vessels, device closure of cardiac defects, and electrophysiology procedures.
2. Relatively common complications to be aware of: Arrhythmias (SVT, AV block, bradycardia, etc.), vascular complications (thrombosis, decreased/absent pulses), intervention-related (balloon rupture, etc.), bleeding.
3. Other less common complications: Myocardial/vessel staining, cardiac perforation, cardiac tamponade, air embolus, infection, allergic reaction, cardiac arrest, and death.

 VII. COMMON CARDIAC COMPLAINTS	
A. Non-Traumatic Chest Pain20
1. Etiologies
a. Life-threatening causes
(1) Cardiac: Congenital heart disease (CHD) with left ventricular outflow tract obstruction, coronary artery abnormality, pericardi- tis, myocarditis, dilated cardiomyopathy, aortic root dissection; cardiac etiologies are rare in children (prevalence <6%).25
(2) Non-cardiac: Pneumothorax, pulmonary embolism, pulmonary HTN, acute chest syndrome.
b. Common, non-cardiac causes (94% to 99% patients): Musculoskeletal (costochondritis), respiratory (asthma, pneumonia,

184	Part II  Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information

 FIGURE 7.10 
Radiological Contours of the Heart. AO, Aorta; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LAA, left atrial appendage; LPA, left pulmonary artery; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; RPA, right pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena cava.

pleuritic), gastrointestinal (gastroesophageal reflux disease [GERD]), psychiatric (panic attack, hyperventilation syndrome).
2. When to consider referral to cardiologist: Symptoms that suggest cardiac etiology (palpitations, syncope with exertion, and decreased exercise tolerance), ECG changes, new murmur.
B. Syncope21
1. Etiologies
a. Cardiac etiologies:
(1) Electrical disturbances: Long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome, congenital short QT syndrome, catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.
(2) Structural heart disease: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, coronary artery anomalies, valvular aortic stenosis, dilated cardiomyopa- thy, acute myocarditis, pulmonary HTN.
b. Non-cardiac etiologies21:
(1) Common: Vasovagal syncope (50% pediatric syncope), breath holding spells, orthostatic hypotension.
(2) Life-threatening: Heat illness/stroke, anaphylaxis, toxic ingestion, hypoglycemia.
2. When to consider referral to cardiologist:
a. History: Congenital/acquired heart disease, syncope with exertion, associated chest pain or palpitations.




ECHOCARDIOGRAMS
Transthoracic Echocardiogram (TTE)	Transesophageal Echocardiogram (TEE)


Pros	Does not require general anesthesia
Simpler to perform than TEE

Better views in obese patients
Good for intraoperative use
Better visualization of small lesions/ vegetations





















 FIGURE 7.11 


1. Norwood
a. Neo-aorta
b. Modified BT shunt
c. Sano modification - RV to pulmonary artery conduit
d. Atrial septectomy

2. Glenn (bidirectional) SVC attached to R PA BT shunt divided

3. Fontan (extracardiac) IVC attached to R PA
+/- fenestration to RA

Schematic diagram of cardiac shunts, including the modified Blalock-Taussig (BT), Sano modification, bidirectional Glenn, and Fontan shunts.


b. Family history: Early sudden cardiac death, arrhythmia, cardiomyopathy.
c. Evaluation: Abnormal cardiac exam or abnormal ECG.

See Table EC 7.D for exercise recommendations for patients with CHD.22

 IX. LIPID MONITORING RECOMMENDATIONS	
A. Screening of Children and Adolescents23
1. Universal screening: Children 9 to 11 years old (prior to onset of puberty) and at 17 to 21 years.
2. Targeted screening: 2 to 8 years old and 12 to 16 years old with risk factors:
a. Moderate or high-risk medical condition: History of prematurity, very low birth weight, CHD (repaired or unrepaired), recurrent urinary tract infections, renal or urologic malformations, family history of congenital renal disease, solid organ transplant, malig- nancy or bone marrow transplant, treatment with drugs known to raise BP, other systemic illness associated with HTN (e.g., neuro- fibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis), evidence of elevated intracranial pressure.
b. Other cardiovascular risk factors, including diabetes, HTN, body mass index =95th percentile, cigarette use.



CARDIAC SURGERIES29
Intervention	Indication	Procedure
Atrial septostomy	Common: TGA, HLHS with restrictive atrial septum	Percutaneous procedure with balloon-tipped catheter, intra-arterial opening Less common: tricuspid/mitral/aortic/pulmonary atresia,		created to allow mixing of blood between systemic and pulmonary systems
TAPVRPalliative systemic-to-pulmonary artery
shunts (e.g., Blalock-Taussig shunt)Lesions with impaired pulmonary perfusion (TOF, HLHS,
tricuspid atresia, pulmonary atresia)Shunt created to increase pulmonary blood flowNorwood procedure, stage 1 (neonatal period)HLHSMPA anastomosis to aorta with arch reconstruction
Modified BTS or Sano performed to provide pulmonary blood flow ASD created for decompression of left atrium
Expected oxygen saturation 75%-85%Bidirectional Glenn shunt or hemi-FontanHLHSBidirectional Glenn shunt or hemi-Fontan to reduce volume overload of single(3-6 months)Intermediate step between Norwood 1 and Fontanright ventricle
Expected oxygen saturation 80%-85%Fontan procedureFunctionally single ventricle (tricuspid atresia, HLHS)Anastomosis of right atria and/or IVC to pulmonary arteries, separates systemic
and pulmonary circulationsExpected oxygen saturation >92%Modified FontanSingle ventricleCompletely separates systemic and pulmonary circulations
Expected oxygen saturations >92%Arterial switchTGAConnects aorta to LV and PA to RV, reconnects coronary arteries to aorta
Normal oxygen saturationsRoss procedure ("switch procedure")Aortic stenosisPulmonary valve used to replace diseased aortic valve, pulmonary valve  replaced by homograft, avoids long-term anticoagulation Normal oxygen saturations

ASD, Atrial septal defect; BTS, Blalock-Taussig shunt; HLHS, hypoplastic left heart syndrome; LV, left ventricle; MPA, main pulmonary artery; PA, pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle; TAPVR, total anomalous pulmonary venous return; TGA, transposition of great arteries; TOF, tetralogy of Fallot.


c. Family history of early cardiovascular disease (CVD) or severe hypercholesterolemia:
(1) Parent or grandparent who at <55 years old (males) or <65 years old (females) suffered an MI or sudden death, underwent a coro- nary artery procedure, or who had evidence of coronary athero- sclerosis, peripheral vascular disease, or cerebrovascular disease.
(2) Parent with total cholesterol =240 mg/dL or known dyslipidemia.

Yes

No




Y


Yes

No
No	Yes





 FIGURE 7.12 
Algorithm for the evaluation of non-traumatic chest pain. ABCs, airway, breathing, and circulation; EKG, electrocardiogram; PALS, pediatric advanced life support; PE, pulmo- nary embolism; PMH, past medical history.

188	Part II  Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information

B. Goals for Lipid Levels in Childhood23
1. Total cholesterol
a. Acceptable (<170 mg/dL): Repeat measurement in 3 to 5 years.
b. Borderline (170 to 199 mg/dL): Repeat cholesterol and average with previous measurement. If <170 mg/dL, repeat in 3 to 5 years. If = 170 mg/dL, obtain lipoprotein analysis.
c. High (=200 mg/dL): Obtain lipoprotein analysis.
2. Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol
a. Acceptable (<110 mg/dL)
b. Borderline (110 to 129 mg/dL)
c. High (=130 mg/dL)

 X. CARDIOVASCULAR SCREENING	
A. Sports24
There is no established or mandated pre-participation sports screening. There is a recommended history and physical examination screening from the AHA.24 Routine ECGs are not required unless there is suspicion of underlying cardiac disease Box EC 7.A).
B. Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)27
1. Obtain a good patient and family history as well as physical examination.
2. There is no increased risk of sudden cardiac death in children without cardiac disease taking ADHD medications. There is no consensus on universal ECG screening. ECGs should be obtained in those who screen with positive answers on history, in cases of polypharmacy, in those with tachycardia while on medications, and in those with a history of significant cardiac disease. If a patient has significant heart disease
or concern for cardiac disease, have patient evaluated by a pediatric cardiologist.

 XI. WEB RESOURCES	
• http://www.pted.org
• https://murmurquiz.org

 REFERENCES	
A complete list of references can be found online at www.expertconsult.com.




EXERCISE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE AND SPORTS ALLOWED FOR SOME SPECIFIC CARDIAC LESIONS18
DiagnosisSports AllowedSmall ASD or VSDNo restrictionMild aortic stenosisNo restrictionMVP (without other risk factors)No restrictionModerate aortic stenosisIA, IB, IIAMild LV dysfunctionIA, IB, ICModerate LV dysfunctionIA onlyLong QT syndromeIA onlyHypertrophic cardiomyopathyNone (or IA only)Severe aortic stenosisNoneSports Classification	Low Dynamic (A)Moderate Dynamic (B)High Dynamic (C)I. Low static	BilliardsBaseball/SoftballRacket sportsBowlingTable tennisCross-country skiingGolfVolleyballField hockeyaRifleryFencingRace walkingRunning (long distance)SocceraII. Moderate static	ArcheryFencingBasketballaAuto racinga,bField events (jumping)Ice hockeyaDivinga,bFigure skatingaCross-country skiingEquestriana,bFootball (American)a(skating technique)Motorcyclinga,bSurfingSwimmingRugbyaLacrosseaRunning (sprint)Running (middleSynchronized swimmingbdistance)Team handballIII. High static	BobsleddingBodybuildinga,bBoxing/WrestlingaField eventsDownhill skiinga,bMartial artsaGymnasticsa,bSkateboardinga,bRowingRock climbingSpeed skatingSailingCyclinga,bWindsurfinga,bWaterskiinga,bWeight-liftinga,baDanger of bodily collision.
bIncreased risk if syncope occurs.
ASD, Atrial septal defect; LV, left ventricular; MVP, mitral valve prolapse; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
Data from Maron BJ, Zipes DP. 36th Bethesda Conference: Eligibility recommendations for competitive athletes with cardiovascular abnormalities. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45(8):1318-1321; and Committee on Sports Medicine and Fitness, American Academy of Pediatrics. Medical conditions affecting sports participation. Pediatrics. 2001;107(5):1205-1209.


BOX EC 7.A
THE 12-ELEMENT AMERICAN HEART ASSOCIATION RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PARTICIPATION: CARDIOVASCULAR SCREENING OF COMPETITIVE ATHLETES
Medical Historya Personal History
1. Exertional chest pain/discomfort
2. Unexplained syncope/near syncopeb
3. Excessive exertional and unexplained dyspnea/fatigue, associated with exercise
4. Prior recognition of a heart murmur
5. Elevated systemic blood pressure

Family History
1. Premature death (sudden and unexpected, or otherwise) before age 50 years due to heart disease, in =1 relative
2. Disability from heart disease in a close relative <50 years of age
3. Specific knowledge of certain cardiac conditions in family members: Hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy, long-QT syndrome or other ion chan- nelopathies, Marfan syndrome, or clinically important arrhythmias
Physical Examination
1. Heart murmurc
2. Femoral pulses to exclude aortic coarctation
3. Physical stigmata of Marfan syndrome
4. Brachial artery blood pressure (sitting position)d

aParental verification is recommended for high school and middle school athletes.
bJudged not to be neurocardiogenic (vasovagal); of particular concern when related to exertion. cAuscultation should be performed in both supine and standing positions (or with Valsalva maneu- ver), specifically to identify murmurs of dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction. dPreferably taken in both arms.
From Maron BJ, Thompson PD, Ackerman MJ, et al. Recommendations and considerations related to preparticipation screening for cardiovascular abnormalities in competitive athletes: 2007 update: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism: endorsed by the American College of Cardiology Foundation. Circulation. 2007;115:1643-1655.


 REFERENCES	
1. Zubrow AB, Hulman S, Kushner H, et al. Determinants of blood pressure in infants admitted to neonatal intensive care units: a prospective multicenter study. Philadelphia neonatal blood pressure study group. J Perinatol. 1995;15:470-479.
2. Joseph T. Flynn, David C. Kaelber, Carissa M. Baker-Smith, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline for Screening and Management of High Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents. Urbina, subcommittee on
screening and management of high blood pressure in children. Pediatrics. 2017: e20171904. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-1904.
3. Park MK. Pediatric Cardiology for Practitioners. 5th ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2008.
4. Sapin SO. Recognizing normal heart murmurs: a logic-based mnemonic.
Pediatrics. 1997;99:616-619.
5. Davignon A, Rautaharju P, Boisselle E, et al. Normal ECG standards for infants and children. Pediatr Cardiol. 1979;1:123-131.
6. Schwartz PJ, Stramba-Badiale M, Segantini A, et al. Prolongation of the QT interval and the sudden infant death syndrome. N Engl J Med. 1998;338:1709-1714.
7. Garson Jr A. The Electrocardiogram in Infants and Children: A Systematic Approach. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 1983.
8. Park MK, Guntheroth WG. How to Read Pediatric ECGs. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2006.
9. Walsh EP. Cardiac arrhythmias. In: Fyler DC, Nadas A, eds. Pediatric Cardiology. Philadelphia: Hanley & Belfus; 1992:384.
10. Towbin JA, Bricker JT, Garson Jr A. Electrocardiographic criteria for diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction in childhood. Am J Cardiol. 1992;69:1545-1548.
11. Hirsch R, Landt Y, Porter S, et al. Cardiac troponin I in pediatrics: normal values and potential use in assessment of cardiac injury. J Pediatr. 1997;130:872-877.
12. Colan SD, Parness IA, Spevak PJ, et al. Developmental modulation of myocar- dial mechanics: age- and growth-related alterations in afterload and contractility. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1992;19:619-629.
13. Stanger P, Heymann MA, Tarnoff H, et al. Complications of cardiac catheteriza- tion of neonates, infants, and children. Circulation. 1974;50:595-608.
14. Vitiello R, McCrindle BW, Nykanen D, et al. Complications associated with pediatric cardiac catheterization. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998;32(5):1433-1440.
15. Lees MH. Cyanosis of the newborn infant: recognition and clinical evaluation. J Pediatr. 1970;77:484-498.
16. Kitterman JA. Cyanosis in the newborn infant. Pediatr Rev. 1982;4:13-24.
17. Jones RW, Baumer JH, Joseph MC, et al. Arterial oxygen tension and response to oxygen breathing in differential diagnosis of heart disease in infancy. Arch Dis Child. 1976;51:667-673.
18. Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al. Prevention of infective endocardi- tis: guidelines from the American Heart Association: a guidelines from the American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, and the Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and the Quality of Care and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary Working Group. Circulation. 2007;116:1736-1754.
19. McCrindle BW, Rowley AH, et al. Diagnosis, treatment, and long-term manage- ment of Kawasaki disease. Circulation. 2017;135:e927-e999.
20. Friedman KG, Alexander ME. Chest pain and syncope in children: a practical approach to the diagnosis of cardiac disease. J Pediatri. 2013;163:896-901.


21. Massin, et al. Syncope in pediatric patients presenting to an emergency department. J Pediatri. 2004;145:223-228.
22. Maron BJ, Zipes DP. Introduction: eligibility recommendations for com- petitive athletes with cardiovascular abnormalities. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45:1318-1321.
23. Expert panel on integrated guidelines for cardiovascular health and risk reduction in children and adolescents: summary report. Pediatrics. 2011;128(suppl 5):S213-S256.
24. Maron BJ, Thompson PD, Ackerman MJ, et al. Recommendations and considerations related to preparticipation screening for cardiovascular abnormalities in competitive athletes: 2007 update: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism: endorsed by the American College of Cardiology Foundation. Circulation. 2007;115:1643-1655.
25. Reddy SV, Singh HR. Chest pain in children and adolescents. Pediatrics in Review. 2010;31:e1-e9.
26. Brown JL, Hirsh DA, Mahle WT. Use of troponin as a screen for chest pain in the pediatric emergency department. Pediatric Cardiology. 2012;33:337-342.
27. Perrin JM, Friedman RA, Knilans TK. Cardiovascular monitoring and stimulant drugs for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Pediatrics. 2008;122:451.
28. American Academy of Pediatrics. Prevention of Bacterial Endocarditis. In: Kimberlin DW, Brady MT, Jackson MA, Long SS, et al., eds. Red Book: 2018 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases. American Academy of Pediatrics; 2018:1044-1045.
29. Gaca AM, Jaggers JJ, Dudley LT, et al. Repair of congenital heart disease: a primer-part 1. Radiology. 2008;247(3):617-631.

Chapter 8
Dermatology
Jennifer Reed DiBiagio, MD and
M. Cooper Lloyd, MD, MPH

 See additional content on Expert Consult

 I. EVALUATION AND CLINICAL DESCRIPTIONS OF SKIN FINDINGS	
A. Primary Skin Lesions
1. Macule: Small, flat, well-circumscribed discolored lesion (<1 cm)
2. Patch: Large macule (>1 cm)
3. Papule: Small, elevated, firm, well-circumscribed superficial lesion (<1 cm)
4. Plaque: Large papule (>1 cm)
5. Pustule: Small, well-circumscribed elevation of skin containing puru- lent material (<1 cm)
6. Vesicle: Small, well-circumscribed elevation of skin containing serous fluid (<0.5 cm)
7. Bulla: Large vesicle (>0.5 cm)
8. Wheal: Transient, raised, well-circumscribed lesion with erythematous periphery and central pallor
9. Nodule: Soft or firm lesion in dermis or subcutaneous fat (>1 cm)
10. Tumor/mass: Solid, firm lesion (typically >2 cm)
B. Secondary Skin Lesions
1. Scale: Small, thin plates shedding from the surface of the skin
2. Crust: Solidified exudative material from erosions or ruptured vesicles/ pustules
3. Erosion: Loss of the most superficial layers of the epidermis from fric- tion, pressure, or inflammation
4. Ulcer: Full thickness loss of the epidermis and dermis, with clearly defined edges
5. Fissure: Linear or wedge-shaped epidermal tear associated with inflam- mation and pain
6. Excoriation: Superficial linear abrasions secondary to scratching
7. Lichenification: Thickening of the epidermis with accentuated skin lines, secondary to chronic inflammation and/or scratching
8. Scar: Formation of new connective tissue after full thickness injury to skin, leaving permanent change in skin
C. Shapes and Arrangements
1. Linear: Distributed along a line
2. Dermatomal: Following a dermatome
3. Filiform: Thread-like


4. Serpiginous: Wavy, coiled, serpentine pattern
5. Annular: Ring-like configuration
6. Nummular/discoid: Disk-like lesion
7. Targetoid: Resembling a bull's eye target with central erythema sur- rounded by pale edema with a peripheral border of erythema
8. Clustered: Lesions in a group
9. Herpetiform: Clustered vesicular lesions on erythematous bases
10. Reticulated: Net or lacey distribution
11. Geographic: Resembling outlines on a map such as a continent
12. Morbilliform: Eruption of erythematous to dusky coalescing macules with interspersed healthy skin

 II. VASCULAR ANOMALIES1	
A. Vascular Tumors
1. Infantile hemangiomas (Fig. 8.1, Color Plates).2,3
a. Pathogenesis: Benign vascular tumor with rapid proliferation followed by spontaneous involution. Most present before 4 weeks of age. Undergo rapid growth between 1 and 2 months of age, with 80% of size reached by 3 months. Most begin to regress between 6 and 12 months of age, with the majority of tumor regression occurring by 4 years of age. 50% to 70% resolve completely.
b. Clinical presentation: Newborns may demonstrate pale macules with threadlike telangiectasias that later develop into hemangiomas. May be superficial, deep, or mixed. After involution, can have residual skin changes including scarring and atrophy.
c. Indicators that should prompt consideration for early treatment:
(1) Potential for life-threatening complications: Airway hemangiomas, liver hemangiomas (associated with high-output heart failure and severe hypothyroidism), and profuse bleeding from an ulcerated hemangioma.
(2) Risk of functional impairment: Interference with the develop- ment of vision (if near eye) and interference with feeding (if near mouth).
(3) Ulceration: Most common complication (5% to 21%). Can be extremely painful and usually scars; risk greatest in large
hemangiomas and those located in skin creases, particularly the diaper area.
(4) Associated structural anomalies: PHACES syndrome (Posterior cranial fossa malformations, large segmental facial
Hemangiomas, Arterial lesions, Cardiovascular anomalies (aortic anomalies), Eye anomalies, Sternal cleft anomalies/supraumbili- cal raphes4) and LUMBAR syndrome (Lower body hemangioma, Urogenital anomalies, Ulceration, Myelopathy, Bony deformities, Anorectal malformations, Arterial anomalies, Renal anomalies).
(5) Potential for disfigurement: Risk of permanent scarring or distor- tion of anatomic landmarks.




INDICATIONS TO OBTAIN IMAGING OF INFANTILE HEMANGIOMAS
Indication	Imaging Modality

2. Five or more cutaneous IH	Abdominal ultrasound with Doppler (screen for hepatic
IH)

3. Associated structural abnormalities (e.g., PHACE syndrome or LUMBAR syndrome) are suspected
1. 
If PHACE syndrome is suspected, MRI/MRA head/ neck with and without contrast; echocardiography
2. If LUMBAR syndrome is suspected, spinal ultra- sound and abdominal ultrasound with Doppler are initial screen, with MRI likely to follow
3. May wish to consult with hemangioma specialist on exact imaging to be ordered

From Krowchuk D, Frieden IJ, Mancini AJ, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the management of infantile hemangiomas.
Pediatrics. 2019;143(1):1-28.

d. Diagnosis: Usually diagnosed clinically. Atypical clinical findings, growth pattern, and equivocal imaging should prompt tissue biopsy to exclude other neoplasms or unusual vascular malformations. See Table 8.1 for indications to order imaging.
e. Treatment:
(1) Most are uncomplicated and can be observed with watchful waiting. Photo documentation is used to follow the growth and regression process.
(2) If an infantile hemangioma is identified as high risk, the child should be evaluated by a hemangioma specialist promptly, as there is a narrow window of opportunity in which to intervene and prevent poor outcomes.
(3) ß-adrenergic blockers such as propranolol are considered first-line therapy for complicated infantile hemangiomas and should be initiated under supervision of a pediatric dermatologist or experi-
enced practitioner.5 While patients should be clinically screened for cardiac disease, EKG and/or echocardiogram are not required unless there is clinical concern. Contraindications include: Reactive airways, sinus bradycardia, decompensated heart failure, greater than 1st degree heart block, hypotension, hypoglycemia, hypersensitivity to propranolol. Off label use of selective beta- blockers may be considered in certain patients. Duration should be at least 6 months and up to 12 months of age.6
(4) Corticosteroids are considered second line. Similar efficacy to propranolol in a prospective, randomized, investigator-blinded trial, but propranolol is better tolerated and with fewer severe side effects.7
(5) Topical timolol is effective in superficial, uncomplicated heman- giomas (recommend 0.5% gel forming solution).


2. Pyogenic granuloma (Lobular Capillary Hemangioma) (Fig. 8.2, Color Plates)
a. Clinical presentation: Benign vascular tumor, appears as small (usu- ally 3 to 10 mm but occasionally much larger) bright red papule that grows over several weeks to months into sessile or pedunculated papule with a "collarette," scale, or crust. Can bleed profusely with minor trauma and can ulcerate. Rarely spontaneously regresses. Seen in all ages; average age of diagnosis 6 months to 10 years. Located on head and neck, sometimes in oral mucosa but can be at any skin site and often misdiagnosed as hemangiomas.
b. Treatment: Usually required, given frequent bleeding and ulceration. Options include shave excision or curettage with cautery of base, surgical excision, carbon dioxide laser excision, or pulsed dye laser therapy. For most cases, shave and cautery are quick, safe, low risk, and can be performed quickly with local anesthesia.
B. Vascular Malformations
Include capillary (port-wine stains and salmon patch/stork bite/angel kiss), lymphatic, venous, and arteriovenous malformations.
   Note: For a comparison of vascular malformations to vascular tumors, please see Table EC 8.A.8

 III. INFECTIONS	
A. Viral
1. Warts
a. Pathogenesis: Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) of the epithelium or mucus membrane.
b. Clinical presentation:
(1) Common warts: Skin-colored, rough, minimally scaly papules and nodules found most commonly on the hands, although can occur anywhere. Can be solitary or multiple, range from a few millimeters to several centimeters, may form large plaques or a confluent linear pattern secondary to autoinoculation. Sometimes persistent in immunocompromised patients.
(2) Flat warts: Flesh to brown/yellow-colored, smooth, flat-topped papules commonly found over the hands, arms, and face. Usually <2 mm in diameter and often present in clusters.
(3) Plantar warts: Occur on soles of feet as inward growing, hyperkeratotic plaques and papules. Trauma on weight-bearing surfaces results in small black dots (petechiae from thrombosed vessels on the surface of the wart). Can be painful.
c. Diagnosis: Clinical diagnosis.
d. Treatment9:
(1) Spontaneous resolution occurs in greater than 75% of warts in otherwise healthy individuals within 3 years. No specific treatment clearly better than placebo, except possibly topical salicylic acid.




DIFFERENTIATING VASCULAR TUMORS AND VASCULAR MALFORMATIONS

Vascular tumor (infantile hemangioma, pyogenic granuloma, kaposiform hemangioendothelioma, tufted angioma, other tumors)
• Usually not present at birth
• Dynamic
• Regressing
• Proliferative
AVM, Arteriovenous malformation.

Vascular malformation (venous, arterial, AVM, capillary, lymphatic)

• Present at birth
• Static
• Persistent
• Non-proliferative

Adapted from Cohen BA, Rozell-Shannon L. Early diagnosis and intervention of vascular anomalies (infantile hemangiomas and malformations). Pediatric Care Online. http://pediatriccare.solutions.aap.org. Accessed September 2018.


(2) Keratolytics (topical salicylates): Particularly effective in combi- nation with adhesive tape occlusion. Response may take 4 to 6 months.
(3) Destructive techniques, candida antigen, cantharidin, or "beetle juice" are not clearly more effective than placebo. Additionally, destructive techniques can be painful and cause scarring. These options are not recommended in children.
2. Molluscum contagiosum (Fig. 8.3, Color Plates)
a. Pathogenesis: Large DNA poxvirus. Spread by skin-to-skin contact.
b. Clinical presentation: Dome-shaped, often umbilicated, trans- lucent to white papules that range from 1 mm to 1 cm. Occur anywhere except palms and soles, most commonly on the trunk and intertriginous areas. Can occur in the genital area and lower abdomen when obtained as a sexually transmitted infection. May be pruritic and can be surrounded by erythema, resembling eczema.
c. Diagnosis: Clinical diagnosis.
d. Treatment: Most spontaneously resolve within 6 to 18 months and do not require intervention other than monitoring for secondary bacterial infection. Surrounding eczematous changes may indicate an immu- nologic reaction and serve as a harbinger of regression. Treatment may cause scarring and may not be more effective than placebo. Recurrences are common.
3. Herpes simplex virus
a. Pathogenesis: Either HSV-1 or HSV-2 may be implicated, regardless of lesion location. During the initial outbreak, oral lesions last 2 to
3 weeks whereas genital lesions may last 2 to 6 weeks. Recurrent episodes are usually much shorter.
b. Clinical presentation (Fig. 8.6, Color Plate): Symptoms include prodrome of tingling, itching, or burning followed by painful vesicles on erythematous base that may last 7 to 10 days, break open, and crust prior to healing, flu-like symptoms, dehydration (gingivostoma- titis), dysuria (genital), ophthalmologic symptoms (keratitis). May be triggered by stress, illness, sun exposure, and menstruation. The first outbreak is typically the worst.
c. Diagnosis: Diagnosed clinically and, in many centers, with viral DNA PCR (more sensitive than culture). To culture a lesion, clean with alcohol, un-roof lesion with sterile needle or wooden side of cotton swab, collect vesicular fluid on sterile swab, and send in viral trans- port medium.
d. Treatment: Acyclovir or valacyclovir for 7 to 14 days (see Formulary for dosing). For children with herpetic gingivostomatitis, antiviral therapy should be initiated within 72 to 96 hours of onset if they are unable to drink or have significant pain. Valacyclovir is generally
preferred as it is more bioavailable than acyclovir and, as a result, is dosed less frequently.


4. Erythema infectiosum ("fifth disease")
a. Pathogenesis: Parvovirus B19.
b. Clinical presentation: Pediatric presentation of nonspecific febrile illness with headache, coryza, and gastrointestinal complaints. Two to five days after onset of symptoms, the classic malar rash with "slapped cheek" appearance erupts, followed by a reticular rash to the trunk several days later. Associated signs and symptoms include arthralgias (more common in adults) and a transient aplastic crisis, which may be more of a problem in patients with hemoglobinopa- thies and pregnant women.
c. Diagnosis: Clinical diagnosis, serum IgM, or serum DNA PCR.
d. Treatment: Supportive care and avoiding contact with pregnant women.
5. Pityriasis rosea
a. Pathogenesis: Viral etiology (possibly HHV-6, HHV-7) has been hypothesized but no definitive cause has been described.
b. Clinical presentation: Typically asymptomatic or may have mild pru- ritus. Classic presentation with a round to oval, sharply demarcated, scaly, salmon-colored herald patch with central clearing on trunk followed by a "Christmas tree" distribution of oval crops of lesions similar to herald patch. Pediatric patients may have an atypical distri- bution involving the scalp, face, distal extremities, and sparing of the trunk. Lesions typically resolve in 4 to 6 weeks.
c. Diagnosis: Clinical diagnosis.
d. Treatment: Typically self-resolving.
6. Roseola infantum (Fig. 8.5, Color Plates)
a. Pathogenesis: Human Herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6).
b. Clinical presentation: Typically diagnosed in children <2 years old with peak 7 to 13 months. Febrile phase of 3 to 5 days of high fever (often >40°C), viremia, and irritability. As febrile phase resolves, patients develop a morbilliform rash on neck and trunk that spreads centripetally to face and extremities for 1 to 2 days.
c. Diagnosis: Clinical diagnosis.
d. Treatment: Self-resolving.
7. Hand, foot, and mouth disease
a. Pathogenesis: Most commonly Coxsackievirus A serotypes.
b. Clinical presentation: Oral lesions on the tongue, buccal mucosa, and palate that initially are 1 to 5 mm erythematous macules and evolve to vesicles and ulcers with a thin erythematous halo. Erythematous, non-pruritic 1 to 10 mm macules, papules, and/or vesicles on the palms and soles. Typically resolve in 3 to 4 days. Usually non- tender, unless caused by Coxsackie A6 (associated with high fevers, widespread lesions, longer duration [12 days], palmar and plantar desquamation, and nail dystrophy).
c. Diagnosis: Clinical diagnosis.
d. Treatment: Supportive care.


8. Reactive erythema (Fig. 8.4; Figs. 8.5-8.10, Color Plates)
a. Pathogenesis: Represent cutaneous reaction patterns triggered by endogenous and environmental factors (e.g., viral infections, drug reactions).
b. Clinical presentation: Group of disorders characterized by erythema- tous patches, plaques, and nodules that vary in size, shape, and distribution.
B. Parasitic
1. Scabies (Fig. 8.11, Color Plates)
a. Pathogenesis: Caused by the mite Sarcoptes scabiei. Spread by skin- to-skin contact and through fomites. Can live for 2 days away from a human host. Female mites burrow and lay eggs under the skin.
b. Clinical presentation: Initial lesion is a small, erythematous papule that is easy to overlook. Can have burrows (elongated, edematous papulovesicles, often with a pustule at the advancing border) which are pathognomonic. Most commonly located in interdigital webs, wrist folds, elbows, axilla, genitals, buttocks, and belt line. In temper- ate climates, the face and scalp are usually spared. In young infants, the palms and soles are also commonly involved. Burrows are
most dramatic in patients who are unable to scratch (e.g., infants). Disseminated eczematous eruption results in generalized severe pruritus, especially at night. Can become nodular, particularly in intertriginous areas, or be susceptible to superinfection due to fre- quent excoriations. Immunosuppressed patients may develop diffuse scaly crusted eruption and lack pruritus.
c. Treatment10:
(1) Permethrin cream: 5% cream applied to skin from neck down in normal hosts including under fingernails and toenails. Rinse off after 8 to 14 hours. Can repeat in 7 to 10 days.
(2) Ivermectin (off-label use): Single dose; can repeat in 2 weeks. Efficacy comparable to permethrin cream. May be the best choice for immunodeficient patients where total body application may be difficult.
(3) Environment: Mites cannot live away from human skin for more than 2 to 3 days. Launder clothing and sheets. Bag and seal stuffed animals and pillows for 2 to 3 days. Consider treatment of close contacts.
C. Fungal (Figs. 8.12-8.16, Color Plates)
1. Tinea capitis (see Fig. 8.12, Color Plates)
a. Pathogenesis: Mostly caused by fungi of the genus Trichophyton in North America (95%), less commonly Microsporum (5% or less), and spread through contact and fomites.
b. Epidemiology: Usually occurs in young children, with higher inci- dence in African American children, but any age and ethnicity can be affected.



Yes	Yes

No
Yes

No
Yes
No


Yes

Yes

No
Yes


No
Yes

No
Yes


No
Yes	Yes


No
Yes

No
No



Yes

No





Yes





No

Yes


Yes
No
Yes

No
Yes


Yes




 FIGURE 8.4 
Reactive erythema. (Modified from Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:206.)


c. Clinical presentation:
(1) Black dot: Most common. Slowly growing, erythematous, scaling patches. These areas develop alopecia and black dots are vis- ible on scalp where hair has broken.
(2) Gray patch ("seborrheic dermatitis type"): Erythematous, scaling, well-demarcated patches that grow centrifugally. Hair breaks off a few millimeters above the scalp and takes on a gray/ frosted appearance.
(3) Kerion (see Fig. 8.13, Color Plates): Complication of tinea capitis or tinea corporis. Type IV hypersensitivity to fungus. Raised, boggy/spongy lesions, often tender and covered with purulent exudate. Most commonly occurs months after primary infection.
(4) All can be associated with posterior cervical lymphadenopathy.
d. Diagnosis: Can be made clinically, but since oral antifungal therapy is indicated, tinea capitis should be confirmed by direct microscopic exam of a potassium hydroxide (KOH) preparation of the proximal ends of hairs, gently and painlessly scraped from the affected area. Cultures may be obtained by using a sterile toothbrush or cotton swab. The scale can be scraped directly into a sterile plastic cup and/or the cotton swab tips can be broken off and placed into the sterile plastic cups.
e. Treatment11: Always requires systemic therapy. First-line therapy includes oral griseofulvin for 10 to 12 weeks (which should be taken with fatty foods for improved absorption) and terbinafine for 6 weeks (see Formulary for dosing). Most experts consider terbinafine supe- rior to griseofulvin for T. tonsurans because of its shorter duration of therapy and superior effectiveness. The FDA recommends baseline and follow-up hepatic function testing in children taking terbinafine, though most clinicians forego laboratory testing in healthy children without history of liver disease if treatment is 6 weeks or less. Though not FDA-approved for tinea capitis, fluconazole at 6 mg/kg/day (max 400 mg/day) for 6 weeks is recommended by the AAP Red Book as an alternative treatment of tinea capitis in children younger than 2 years old.12 All family members, particularly other children, should be examined carefully for subtle infection. Selenium sulfide 2.5% shampoo may shorten the period of shedding of fungal organisms and reduce risk of infection of unaffected family members.
2. Tinea corporis and pedis11 (see Figs. 8.14 and 8.15, Color Plates)
a. Pathogenesis: Spread through direct contact and fomites, especially in sports with close contact.
b. Clinical presentation: Pruritic, erythematous, annular patch or plaque with central clearing and a scaly raised border. Typically affects glabrous skin (smooth and bare).
c. Diagnosis: Usually diagnosed clinically, but a KOH preparation or fungal culture can be used to help guide diagnosis.
d. Treatment: Topical antifungals (terbinafine, azole) through 1 to 2 weeks past lesion resolution. Widespread eruption may require oral antifungals.


3. Tinea versicolor (see Fig. 8.16, Color Plates)
a. Pathogenesis: Caused by Malassezia. Exacerbated by hot/humid weather, hyperhidrosis, topical skin oil use. Most people are colo- nized with Malassezia but only a small number are prone to develop clinical lesions. Not associated with poor hygiene. Not contagious.
b. Clinical presentation: Well demarcated, minimally scaly, hypopig- mented macules or patches. Hypopigmented areas tend to be more prominent in the summer because affected areas do not tan. Lesions often have a fine scale that may be noted following gentle rubbing and can be mildly pruritic but are usually asymptomatic.
c. Diagnosis: KOH microscopy reveals pseudohyphae and yeast cells that appear like "spaghetti and meatballs."
d. Treatment: Topical antifungal shampoos and/or creams (miconazole, oxiconazole, ketoconazole) or selenium sulfide are effective. Given the risk of hepatotoxicity, oral azole antifungals are reserved for resistant or widespread disease. Oral terbinafine is not effective. Pigmentation changes may take months to resolve despite successful treatment.
D. Bacterial
1. Impetigo
a. Pathogenesis: Contagious bacterial infection of the skin, most com- monly caused by Staphylococcus aureus (99% MSSA), with a minor- ity of cases caused by Group A Streptococcus.
b. Clinical presentation:
(1) Nonbullous impetigo: Papules that evolve into erythematous pustules or vesicles that break and form thick, honey-colored crusts and plaques. Commonly overlying any break to skin bar- rier. Primarily face and extremities.
(2) Bullous impetigo: Painless vesicles that evolve into flaccid bullae and crusted patches with undermined border. Seen more in infants and young children. Caused by Staphylococcus aureus exfoliative toxin A.
c. Diagnosis: Clinical diagnosis.
d. Treatment: When impetigo is contained to a small area, topical mupi- rocin may be used for 5 days. When the infection is widespread,
an oral antibiotic such as cephalexin should be used for 7 days. Consider broader coverage if MRSA is suspected, although MSSA accounts for most infections.
2. Staph scalded skin syndrome
a. Pathogenesis: Staphylococcus aureus infections of the skin with hema- togenous dissemination of exfoliative toxin A or B to the epidermis.
b. Clinical presentation: Typical presentation is Ritter disease (general- ized exfoliation) in a 3- to 7-day-old infant who initially is febrile and irritable with conjunctivitis and perioral erythema. In addition to newborns, this presentation is seen in young children who do not have antibodies to the toxin and often do not clear the toxin-antibody complex quickly due to decreased renal excretion. One to two days


flaccid bullae and erosions that are Nikolsky positive in areas of mechanical stress such as intertriginous areas. Lesions are not scarring as they are intraepidermal. Older children tend to have a localized bullous impetigo with tender scarlatiniform eruption. Infants and toddlers usually have a combination of the presentations seen in neonates and older children along with white to brown thick flaking desquamation of the entire body, especially the face and neck.
c. Diagnosis: Typically clinically. However, cultures should be obtained from any potential source site of infection or colonization such as the medial canthi or nares.
d. Treatment: Nearly all cases are MSSA, with an increasing number being clindamycin resistant. First-line treatment may include oral penicillinase-resistant beta-lactams such as first or second-generation cephalosporins. Vancomycin should be considered in patients who fail to respond to treatment and/or in areas with a high prevalence of MRSA. Management should also include supportive care with topical emollients and close monitoring of fluid and electrolyte status.
3. Scarlet fever (Fig. 8.17, Color Plates)
a. Pathogenesis: Exotoxin-mediated response to a Streptococcus pyo- genes infection, typically pharyngitis.
b. Clinical presentation: Sandpaper-like, coarse, erythematous, blanch- ing rash that originates in the groin and axilla then spreads to the trunk then extremities but spares the palms and soles. May have Pastia lines. Associated with pharyngitis, circumoral pallor, and a strawberry tongue.
c. Diagnosis: Clinical diagnosis. May benefit from rapid strep test and throat culture.
d. Treatment: No additional treatment aside from treating the patient's
Strep pharyngitis.
4. Cellulitis: See Chapter 17.

 IV. HAIR LOSS (FIGS. 8.18-8.20, COLOR PLATES)	
A. Telogen Effluvium (see Fig. 8.18, Color Plates)
1. Pathogenesis: Most common cause of diffuse hair loss. Mature hair follicles switch prematurely to the telogen (resting) state, with shedding within 3 months.
2. Clinical presentation: Diffuse hair thinning 3 months after a stress- ful event (major illnesses or surgery, pregnancy, severe weight loss).
3. Treatment: Self-limited. Regrowth usually occurs over several months.
B. Alopecia Areata (see Fig. 8.19, Color Plates)
1. Clinical presentation: Chronic inflammatory (probably autoimmune) disease that starts with well-circumscribed small bald patches and normal-appearing underlying skin. New lesions may demonstrate subtle erythema and be pruritic. Bald patches may enlarge to involve large


hair regrowth within 1 to 2 years, although most will relapse. A minor- ity progress to total loss of all scalp (alopecia totalis) and/or body hair (alopecia universalis).
2. Diagnosis: Usually clinical diagnosis.
3. Treatment13: First-line therapy is topical steroids. Referral to dermatology is warranted for consideration of other treatments. No evidence-based data that any therapy is better than placebo. Older children, adoles- cents, and young adults with longstanding localized areas of hair loss have the best prognosis.
C. Traction Alopecia (see Fig. 8.20, Color Plates)
1. Pathogenesis: Hairstyles that apply tension for long periods of time.
2. Clinical presentation: Noninflammatory linear areas of hair loss at mar- gins of hairline, part line, or scattered regions, depending on hairstyling procedures used.
3. Treatment: Avoidance of styling products or styles that result in traction. If traction remains for long periods, condition may progress to perma- nent scarring hair loss.
D. Trichotillomania and Hair Pulling
1. Pathogenesis: Alopecia due to compulsive urge to pull out one's own hair, resulting in irregular areas of incomplete hair loss. Mainly on the scalp; can involve eyebrows and eyelashes. Onset is usually after age 10 and should be distinguished from hair twirling/pulling in younger children that resolves without treatment in most cases.
2. Clinical presentation: Characterized by hair of differing lengths; area of hair loss can be unusual in shape.
3. Treatment: Behavioral modification and consider psychiatric evaluation (can be associated with anxiety, depression, and obsessive-compulsive disorder).

 V. ACNE VULGARIS	
A. Pathogenetic Factors
Follicular hyperkeratinization, increased sebum production, Cutibacterium acnes (formerly Propionibacterium acnes) proliferation, and inflammation.
B. Risk Factors
Androgens, family history, and stress. No strong evidence that dietary habits affect acne.
C. Clinical Presentation
1. Noninflammatory lesions
a. Closed comedone (whitehead): Accumulation of sebum and keratinous material, resulting in white/skin-colored papules without surrounding erythema.
b. Open comedone (blackhead): Dilated follicles filled with keratino- cytes, oils, and melanin.


2. Inflammatory lesions: Papules, pustules, nodules, and cysts with evi- dence of surrounding inflammation. Typically appear later in the course of acne. Nodulocystic presentations are more likely to lead to hyperpig- mentation and/or permanent scarring.
D. Treatment14-16 (Table 8.2)
1. Skin care: Gentle nonabrasive cleaning. Avoid picking or popping lesions. Vigorous scrubbing and abrasive cleaners can worsen acne.
2. Topical first-line therapies: Recommended for mild to moderate acne.
a. Retinoids (Table EC 8.B)
(1) Normalize follicular keratinization and decrease inflammation.
(2) A pea-sized amount should be applied to cover the entire face.
(3) Risks: Cause irritation and dryness of skin. Retinoids should be used at night due to inactivation by sunlight. This class should not be used during pregnancy.
(4) Three topical retinoids (tretinoin, adapalene, and tazarotene) are available by prescription in the United States. Adapalene 0.1% gel has been approved for over-the-counter (OTC) use with significant efficacy.17


PEDIATRIC TREATMENT RECOMMENDATION FOR MILD, MODERATE, AND SEVERE ACNE
Acne Classification  Initial Treatment	Inadequate Response

Mild	Benzoyl peroxide (BPO) or topical retinoid
OR
Topical combination therapy: BPO + Antibiotic or
Retinoid + BPO or
Retinoid + Antibiotic + BPO
Moderate	Topical combination therapy: Retinoid + BPO or
Retinoid + BPO + Antibiotic
OR
Oral Antibiotic
+
Topical Retinoid + BPO or Topical Retinoid + Topical
Antibiotic
+ BPO
Severe	Combination therapy: Oral Antibiotic + Topical Retinoid + BPO ±
Topical Antibiotic
Topical fixed-combination prescriptions available.

Add BPO or retinoid if not already prescribed OR change topical retinoid concentration, type, and/ or formulation OR change topical combination therapy


Change topical retinoid concentration, type, and/or formulation and/or change topical combination therapy OR add or change oral antibiotic. Consider oral isotretinoin (derma- tology referral). Females: consider hormonal therapy.



Consider changing oral antibiotic AND consider oral isotretinoin. Females: consider hormonal therapy. Strongly consider referral to dermatology.

Data from Eichenfield LF, Krakowski AC, Piggott C, et al. Evidence-based recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of pediatric acne. Pediatrics. 2013;131:S163-S186.




FORMULATIONS AND CONCENTRATIONS OF TOPICAL RETINOIDS
RetinoidVehicleaStrength (%)TRETINOINCream0.025, 0.05, 0.1Pregnancy Category CGel0.01, 0.025Gel (micronized)0.05Microsphere gel0.04, 0.1Polymerized cream0.025Polymerized gel0.025ADAPALENECream0.1Pregnancy Category CGel0.1, 0.3Solution0.1Lotion0.1TAZAROTENEGel0.05, 0.1Pregnancy Category XCream0.05, 0.1aNumerous generic retinoids are available. Branded products are available under the following trade names: Atralin,
Avita, and Retin-A Micro for tretinoin; Differin for adapalene; and Tazorac for tazarotene.
Data from Eichenfield LF, Krakowski AC, Piggott C, et al. Evidence-based recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of pediatric acne. Pediatrics. 2013;131:S163-S186, Table 4.

202	Part II  Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information

b. Benzoyl peroxide (BPO)
(1) Oxidizing agent with antibacterial and mild anticomedolytic properties.
(2) Washes may be most convenient formulation, as they can be used in the shower.
(3) Risks: Can bleach hair, clothing, towels, and sheets.
c. Salicylic acid: Topical comedolytic agent that may be found in OTC face washes and serves as an alternative to a topical retinoid.
3. Topical antimicrobials:
a. Azelaic acid: Antimicrobial, comedolytic, and anti-inflammatory. Recommended by the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) for the treatment of postinflammatory dyspigmentation (see Figures EC 8.P and EC 8.S). Available in a 15% gel and a 20% cream (more efficacious).18
b. Erythromycin and clindamycin: Avoid topical antibiotics as monother- apy. Topical BPO should be concurrently used to optimize efficacy and avoid bacterial resistance.
4. Oral antibiotics (Table EC 8.C): Recommended for moderate to severe inflammatory acne that is resistant to topical treatment. These medica- tions should be used with BPO or topical retinoid. Do not use as mono- therapy. Limit to 3 months to minimize bacterial resistance.
a. =8 years old: Doxycycline or minocycline
b. <8 years old, pregnancy, or tetracycline allergy: Azithromycin, eryth-
romycin, or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole.
c. Erythromycin should be used with care due to increased risk of resis- tance. The AAD recommends reserving trimethoprim/sulfamethoxa- zole for patients who have failed other treatments or are unable to tolerate tetracyclines and macrolides.
5. Hormonal therapy: Reduces sebum production and androgen levels. Good option for pubertal females who have sudden onset of moder- ate to severe hormonal acne (often on lower face, jawline) and have not responded to conventional first-line therapies. Should not be used as monotherapy. Combination oral contraceptives (Ortho Tri-Cyclen, Estrostep, and Yaz) or spironolactone (antiandrogen).
6. Oral isotretinoin: Reserved for patients with severe nodular, cystic, or scarring acne who do not respond to traditional therapy or who cannot be weaned from oral antibiotics. Should be managed by a dermatologist. Most patients have complete resolution of their acne after 16 to 20 weeks of use.
a. Side effects:
(1) Teratogenicity: Patients and physicians are mandated by the FDA to comply with the iPledge program to eliminate fetal exposure to isotretinoin. Female patients with child-bearing potential must use two forms of birth control with routine pregnancy testing.
(2) Hepatotoxicity, hyperlipidemia, and bone marrow suppression, a complete blood cell count, fasting lipid profile, and liver func- tion tests should be obtained before initiation of therapy and repeated at 4 and 8 weeks.




FIRST-LINE ORAL ANTIBIOTICS USED FOR TREATMENT OF MODERATE TO SEVERE ACNE VULGARIS
AntibioticPotential Adverse EffectsCommentsDOXYCYCLINEPill esophagitis; photosensitiv-Take with large glass of water andity; staining of forming toothmaintain upward position ~1 hr;enamel (<8 years of age); vaginaloptimize photoprotection; avoid incandidiasischildren without permanent teethMINOCYCLINECutaneous and/or mucosal hyper-Can be taken with meals; warn(IMMEDIATEpigmentation; DHS (systemic,patient about dizziness/vertigo;RELEASE)within first 1-2 months); LLS; SJS;avoid in children without perma-vestibular toxicity (within first fewnent teeth; monitor for pigmentarydays); staining of forming toothchanges on skinenamel (<8 years of age); vaginalcandidiasisMINOCYCLINESame as above although above sideLess accumulation of drug over time(EXTENDEDeffects reported predominantly withdue to pharmacokinetic propertiesRELEASE)immediate release formulations;of extended release formulation,lower incidence of acute vestibularmay correlate with decreasedside effects with weight-basedhyperpigmentationdosingDHS, Drug hypersensitivity syndrome; LLS, lupus-like syndrome; SJS, Stephens-Johnson syndrome.
Modified from Eichenfield LF, Krakowski AC, Piggott C, et al. Evidence-based recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of pediatric acne. Pediatrics. 2013;131:S163-S186, Table 5.



A. Erythema Toxicum Neonatorum (see Fig. 8.22, Color Plates)
1. Clinical presentation: Most common rash of full-term infants; incidence declines with lower birth weight and prematurity. Appears as small ery- thematous macules and papules that evolve into pustules on erythema- tous bases. Rash most often occurs by 24 to 48 hours of life but can be present at birth or emerge as late as 2 to 3 weeks.
2. Course: Self-limited, resolves within 5 to 7 days; recurrences possible.
B. Transient Neonatal Pustular Melanosis (see Figs. 8.23-8.24, Color Plates)
1. Clinical presentation: More commonly affects full-term infants with darker pigmentation. At birth, appears as small pustules on non- erythematous bases that rupture and leave erythematous/hyperpig- mented macules with a collarette of scale.
2. Course: Self-limited macules fade over weeks to months.
C. Miliaria (Heat Rash) (see Fig. 8.25, Color Plates)
1. Clinical presentation: Common newborn rash associated with warmer climates, incubator use, or occlusion with clothes/dressings. Appears as small erythematous papules or pustules usually on face, scalp, or intertriginous areas.
2. Course: Rash resolves when infant is placed in cooler environment or tight clothing/dressings are removed.
D. Milia (see Fig. 8.26, Color Plates)
1. Clinical presentation: Common newborn lesions. Appears as 1- to 3-mm white/yellow papules, frequently found on nose and face; due to reten- tion of keratin and sebaceous materials in pilosebaceous follicles.
2. Course: Self-limited, resolves within first few weeks to few months of life.
E. Neonatal Acne (see Fig. 8.27, Color Plates)
1. Clinical presentation: Seen in 20% of infants. Appears as inflammatory papules or pustules without comedones, usually on face and scalp. Secondary to effect of maternal and endogenous androgens on infant's sebaceous glands.
2. Course: Peaks around 1 month, resolves within a few months, usually without intervention. Does not increase risk of acne as an adolescent.
F. Seborrheic Dermatitis (Cradle Cap) (see Figs. 8.28-8.29, Color Plates)
1. Clinical presentation: Erythematous plaques with greasy yellow scales. Located in areas rich with sebaceous glands, such as scalp, cheeks, ears, eyebrows, intertriginous areas, diaper area. Unknown etiology. Can be seen in newborns, more commonly in infants aged 1 to 4 months.
2. Course: Self-limited and resolves within a few weeks to months.




	
No

Yes

No


Yes


Yes


No
No

Yes

No
Yes





No
Yes


No
Yes

No


No











Yes


Yes

No
Yes



Yes


No

Hypopigmentation?Yes


No
Yes

No
Yes

 FIGURE 8.21 
Evaluation of neonatal rashes. (Modified from Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:62.)


3. Treatment: Can remove scales on scalp with an emollient (e.g., mineral or olive oil, or petroleum jelly) and a soft brush/fine comb. In more severe cases, antifungal shampoos or low-potency topical steroid can shorten the course, although no shampoos are FDA-approved for chil- dren less than 2 years of age.
G. Congenital Dermal Melanocytosis (formerly known as Mongolian Spots)
1. Clinical presentation: Most common pigmented lesion of newborns, usually seen in babies with darker skin tone. Appear as blue/gray macules without definite disappearance of dermal melanocytes. Can be mistaken for child abuse thus accurate documentation at newborn and well-child visits is important.
2. Course: Spots typically fade within first few years of life, with majority resolved or much improved by age 10 years.
H. Diaper Dermatitis19 (see Fig. 8.30, Color Plates)
1. Clinical presentation: Irritant contact dermatitis characterized by erythematous eruption on buttocks and genital areas with exclusion of other potential causes. Rarely associated with diaper candidiasis, characterized by a red, raised papular rash with small pustules at the periphery. Tends to involve the skin creases.19
2. Treatment: Frequent diaper changes, air exposure, adequate drying, gentle cleaning, and judicious use of topical barrier preparations. If per- sistent, can use low-potency topical steroid until cleared. For candidiasis, treatment with topical nystatin, miconazole, or clotrimazole is sufficient. Combination steroid/antifungal creams should be avoided due to steroid- related side effects and association with persistent fungal infections.20

A. Contact Dermatitis
1. Irritant dermatitis: Exposure to physical, chemical, or mechanical irri- tants to the skin. Common irritants include frequent hand washing, hot water, lip-licking, thumb-sucking, and exposure to chemicals, paints, or certain foods like citrus fruits.
2. Allergic dermatitis (see Fig. 8.31, Color Plates):
a. Pathogenesis: Immune reaction to an environmental trigger that comes into contact with the skin. After initial sensitization period of 7 to 10 days in susceptible individuals, an allergic response occurs with subsequent exposures.
b. Common allergens: Toxicodendron spp. (poison ivy, oak, sumac), nickel, cobalt, gold, dyes, fragrances, formaldehyde, and latex.
c. Clinical presentation: Pruritic erythematous dermatitis that can prog- ress to chronic scaling, lichenification, and pigment changes. Poison ivy (see Fig. 8.32, Color Plates): Exposure to urushiol causes streaks of erythematous papules, pustules, and vesicles. Highly pruritic,
can become edematous, especially if rash is on face or genitals. In


d. Diagnosis: Careful history taking and recognition of unusual shapes and locations suggesting an "outside job" allow for clinical diagnosis. Patch testing may also be helpful when trigger cannot be identified.
e. Treatment:
(1) Remove causative agent. Moisturize with ointment like Vaseline or Aquaphor twice per day. Use antihistamine and/or oatmeal baths as needed for itching, sedation, and sleeping, though they do not directly impact the rash.
(2) Mild/moderate: Topical steroids twice a day for 1 week, then daily for 1 to 2 weeks.
(3) Widespread/severe: Systemic steroids for 2 to 3 weeks, with taper. There is no role for short courses of steroids because eruption will flare when drug is stopped.
(4) For poison ivy contact, remove clothing and wash skin with mild soap and water as soon as possible.
B. Atopic Dermatitis (Eczema) (See Figs. 8.33-8.37, Color Plates)
1. Pathogenesis: Due to inadequate skin barrier function from combination of genetic and environmental factors, resulting in transepidermal water loss. Can be associated with elevated serum IgE.
2. Epidemiology21: Affects up to 20% of children in the United States, the vast majority with onset before age 5 years. Other comorbidities may follow including asthma, allergic rhinitis, and food allergies. Eczema resolves or improves in over 75% of patients by adulthood.
3. Clinical presentation: Dry, pruritic skin with acute changes, including erythema, vesicles, crusting, and chronic changes, including scaling, postinflammatory hypo- or hyperpigmentation (see Figures EC 8.P and EC 8.S), and lichenification.
a. Infantile form: Erythematous, scaly lesions on the cheeks, scalp, and extensor surfaces. Covered areas (especially the diaper area) are usually spared.
b. Childhood form: Lichenified plaques in flexural areas.
c. Adolescence: More localized and lichenified skin changes. Predominantly on skin flexures, hands, and feet.
4. Treatment21: See Chapter 15
a. Lifestyle: Avoiding triggers (products with alcohol, fragrances, astrin- gents, sweat, allergens, and excessive bathing). Avoid scratching (eczema is the "itch that rashes").
b. Bathing: Should be less than 5 minutes in lukewarm water with a gentle bar soap and no washcloth or scrubbing. Skin should be patted dry (not rubbed) and followed by rapid application of an emol- lient ("soak and smear").
c. Consider diluted bleach baths once or twice a week (mix 1/4 cup of bleach in full tub of lukewarm water and soak for 10 minutes, then rinse off with fresh water).
d. Skin hydration: Frequent use of bland emollients with minimal water content (Vaseline or Aquaphor). Avoid lotions, as they have high


e. Oral antihistamines: There is little evidence that antihistamines improve skin lesions in atopic dermatitis. Non-sedating antihista- mines can be used for environmental allergies and hives. Sedating antihistamines may be of transient benefit for sedation at bedtime.
f. Treatment for inflammation:
(1) Mild disease: Topical steroids22 (Table 8.3): Low and medium potency steroid ointments once or twice daily for 7 days dur- ing a flare. Severe flares may require a high-potency steroid for a longer duration of therapy, followed by a taper to a low- potency steroid. Use of topical steroids in areas where skin
is thin (groin, axilla, face, under breasts) should generally be avoided. Short durations of low-potency steroids may be used as needed in these areas. Ointments can be applied over steroid.
(2) Moderate disease: Crisaborole is a topical PDE4 inhibitor approved for mild to moderate eczema with preliminary studies of the 2% ointment showing improvement in the majority of clinical signs and symptoms, particularly pruritus.23 Topical calcineurin inhibitors (tacrolimus ointment, pimecrolimus cream) are second-line therapies which should only be used in con- sultation with a dermatologist due to FDA "black box" warnings on these medications for theoretical increased risk of cancer, although there are no data to confirm and long-term safety stud- ies are pending.24,25
(3) Severe disease: Phototherapy with narrowband UVB light is a treatment option for older children and adolescents. Low-dose methotrexate is a consideration before cyclosporine. For many dermatologists, low-dose oral methotrexate is the first oral option for severe disease unresponsive to aggressive topical therapy. Oral cyclosporine is only used in severe cases of older children and adolescents who have failed other treatments due to con- cern for renal compromise. Dupilumab is an IL-4 receptor alpha antagonist prescribed for refractory cases, currently with FDA approval only for treatment in adults.
5. Complications26:
a. Bacterial superinfection: Usually S. aureus, sometimes Group A Streptococcus. Depending on extent of infection, treat with topical mupirocin or systemic antibiotics.
b. Eczema herpeticum superinfection with herpes simplex virus can cause severe systemic infection. Presents as vesiculopustular lesions with central punched-out erosions that do not respond to oral
antibiotics. Must be treated systemically with acyclovir or valacyclovir. Should be evaluated by ophthalmologist if there is concern for eye involvement.
C. Papular Urticaria (See Fig. 8.38, Color Plates)
1. Pathogenesis: Type IV hypersensitivity reaction to fleas, mosquitos, or




RELATIVE POTENCIES OF TOPICAL CORTICOSTEROIDS
Class	Drug	Vehicle(s)	Strength (%)

II. HIGH POTENCY	Amcinonide	Cream, lotion, ointment 0.1

Augmented betamethasone dipropionate

Cream	0.05

Betamethasone propionate	Cream, foam, ointment,
solution

0.05

Desoximetasone	Cream, ointment, gel	0.25 (C,O),
0.05 (G)
Diflorasone diacetate	Cream	0.05

Fluocinonide	Cream, gel, ointment, solution

0.05

Halcinonide	Cream, ointment	0.1
Mometasone furoate	Ointment	0.1
Triamcinolone acetonide	Cream, ointment	0.5










V. LOWER-MEDIUM
POTENCY










Hydrocortisone butyrate	Cream, ointment,
solution










0.1

Hydrocortisone probutate, Prednicarbate

Cream	0.1

Hydrocortisone valerate	Cream, ointment	0.2
VII.LOWEST POTENCY Dexamethasone	Cream	0.1
Hydrocortisone	Cream, lotion	0.25
Cream, ointment	0.5
Cream, solution	1
Hydrocortisone acetate	Cream, ointment	0.5-1
C, Cream; G, gel; O, ointment.
Modified from Eichenfield LF, Tom WL, Berger TG, et al. Guidelines of care for the management of atopic dermatitis. Section 2. Management and treatment of atopic dermatitis with topical therapies. J Am Acad Dernatol. 2014;71(1):116- 132, Table 5.


2. Clinical presentation/epidemiology: Summarized by the SCRATCH principles27:
a. Symmetric eruption: Exposed areas and scalp commonly affected. Spares diaper region, palms, and soles.
b. Cluster: Appear as "meal clusters" or "breakfast, lunch, and dinner" which are linear or triangular groupings of lesions. Associated with bedbugs and fleas.
c. Rover not required: A remote animal exposure or lack of pet at home does not rule out IBIH.
d. Age: Tends to peak by age 2. Not seen in newborn period. Most tend to develop tolerance by age 10.
e. Target lesions: Especially in darkly pigmented patients. Time: Emphasize chronic nature of eruption and need for patience and watchful waiting.
f. Confused pediatrician/parent: Diagnosis often met with disbelief by parent and/or referring pediatrician.
g. Household: Because of the nature of the hypersensitivity, usually only affects one family member in the household.
3. Management (3 Ps):
a. Prevention: Wear protective clothing, use insect repellent when outside (AAP guidelines recommend up to 30% DEET or 12% picari- din containing repellents), launder bedding and mattress pads for bedbugs, and maximize flea control for pets.
b. Pruritis control: Topical steroids or antihistamines may be of some benefit.
c. Patience: Can be frustrating because of its persistent, recurrent nature. Ensure patients that their symptoms will resolve and they will eventually develop tolerance.
D. Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
1. Pathogenesis: Severe mucocutaneous reaction with partial to full epidermal necrosis due to keratinocyte necrosis. Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) has less than 10% involvement of body surface area (BSA), whereas toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) has greater than 30% BSA involvement. SJS/TEN defines the gap of 10% to 30% involvement. Overall mortality for pediatric patients is less than 8%. Commonly caused by medications initiated in previous 8 weeks includ- ing sulfonamide antibiotics, lamotrigine, carbamazepine, phenobarbi- tal, and several oncologic drugs. May also be caused by Mycoplasma pneumonia infections. Nearly one third of cases have no identified trigger.
2. Clinical presentation: Fever and flu-like prodrome for 1 to 3 days prior to mucocutaneous lesions. Ophthalmologic and oropharyngeal symp- toms are often first sites of mucosal involvement. Urogenital mucosal involvement seen in two-thirds of patients may lead to urinary retention and have significant long-term anatomic changes in female patients. Epidermal lesions are described as exquisitely tender (with pain out of


proportion), ill-defined, coalescing macules and patches of erythema with central purple-to-black areas. Lesions typically start on face and trunk then spread in a symmetric distribution sparing the scalp, palms, and soles. Bullae form with disease progression. Then, the epidermis sloughs with positive Nikolsky and Asboe-Hansen (lateral expansion
of bullae with pressure) signs. Acute phase may last 8 to 12 days with reepithelization requiring up to four weeks.
3. Diagnosis: Although usually not necessary, clinical diagnosis may be confirmed with a skin biopsy. Additional work up includes CBC, CMP, ESR, CRP, bacterial and fungal cultures, M. pneumoniae PCR, and CXR.
4. Treatment: Remove offending agent, supportive care, and close monitor- ing of all organ systems in the inpatient/ICU setting. There is controversy regarding IVIG and single dose of TNF-alpha inhibitor early in course. Systemic steroids probably should not be used.
5. Complications: At risk for serious complications including secondary bacterial infections (Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aerugi- nosa), septic shock, pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and epithelial necrosis of the GI tract. Most common complica- tion in children is corneal scarring and dry eye.
E. Autoimmune Bullous Diseases: See Section X, Online Content.

 VIII. NAIL DISORDERS28: SEE SECTION X, ONLINE CONTENT	


 REFERENCES	
A complete list of references can be found online at www.expertconsult.com.


 X. ONLINE CONTENT	
A. Autoimmune and Allergic Lesions
1. Autoimmune bullous diseases
a. Very rare in children but should be considered if bullous lesions do not respond to standard therapy. Suspicion for any of the follow- ing should warrant referral to a dermatologist for diagnosis and management.
b. Pemphigus vulgaris (Figure EC 8.A):
(1) Pathogenesis: IgG autoantibodies to epidermal adhesion mol- ecules, which interrupt integrity of epidermis and/or mucosa and result in extensive blister formation.
(2) Clinical presentation: Flaccid bullae that start in the mouth and spread to face, scalp, trunk, extremities, and other mucosal membranes. Positive Nikolsky sign. Ruptured blisters are painful and prone to secondary infection. Can lead to impaired oral intake if there is significant oral mucosal involvement.
(3) Treatment: Systemic glucocorticoids, rituximab, and/or intrave- nous immunoglobulin.
c. Pemphigus foliaceus:
(1) Pathogenesis: IgG autoantibodies bind to the same antigen as in bullous impetigo and staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome; thus lesions are superficial and rupture easily. Can be triggered by certain drugs, including thiol compounds and penicillins.
(2) Clinical presentation: Scaling, crusting erosions on erythematous base that appear on face, scalp, trunk, and back. No mucosal involve- ment. Lesions are more superficial than in pemphigus vulgaris.
(3) Treatment: Systemic glucocorticoids or rituximab. There is cur- rently a move away from systemic steroids due to good efficacy and safety data on rituximab.
d. Bullous pemphigoid:
(1) Pathogenesis: Autoantibodies to the epithelial basement mem- brane that results in an inflammatory cascade and causes separa- tion of epidermis from dermis and epithelium from subepithelium.

 Figure EC 8.A 
Pemphigus vulgaris. (From Cohen BA. Dermatology Image Atlas; 2001. http://www. dermatlas.org/.)



 Figure EC 8.B 
Acute paronychia. (From Cohen BA. Disorders of the hair and nails. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:211-239.)

(2) Clinical presentation: Prodrome of inflammatory lesions that progresses into large (1 to 3 cm), tense, extremely pruritic bullae on trunk, flexural regions, and intertriginous areas. Few patients have oral mucosal lesions. Negative Nikolsky sign.
(3) Treatment: Immunosuppression (topical glucocorticoids, systemic glucocorticoids, glucocorticoid-sparing agents like methotrexate, mycophenolate, or azathioprine).
e. Dermatitis herpetiformis:
(1) Pathogenesis: Strong genetic predisposition and link to gluten intolerance/celiac disease. IgA deposits found in dermal papillae.
(2) Clinical presentation: Symmetric, intensely pruritic papulovesi- cles clustered on extensor surfaces.
(3) Treatment: Dapsone, strict gluten-free diet.

B. Nail Disorders28
1. Acquired nail disorders
a. Paronychia: Red, tender swelling of proximal or lateral nail folds (Figures EC 8.B and EC 8.C)
(1) Acute form: Caused by bacterial invasion after trauma to cuticle
(a) Clinical features: Exquisite pain, sudden swelling, and abscess formation around one nail.
(b) Treatment: Responds quickly to drainage of abscess and warm tap-water soaks; occasionally anti-staphylococcal antibiotics required.



 Figure EC 8.C 
Chronic paronychia. (From Cohen BA. Disorders of the hair and nails. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:211-239.)

(2) Chronic form: May involve one or several nails, history of fre- quent exposure to water or thumb-sucking; causative organisms Candida species, usually C. albicans.
(a) Clinical features: Mild tenderness, minimal purulence, nail may be discolored or dystrophic.
(b) Treatment: Resolves with topical antifungal agents and water avoidance; heals without scarring when thumb-sucking ends.
b. Nail dystrophy: Distortion and discoloration of normal nail-plate struc- ture; often traumatic or inflammatory causes (Figures EC 8.D-EC 8.I).
(1) Onychomycosis: A result of dermatophyte fungal infection, unusual before puberty. Oral and topical antifungals (terbinafine, itraconazole, ciclopirox) are used off-label with high cure rates and few adverse effects.29
(2) Subungual hematoma: Brown-black nail discoloration following crush injury. Usually resolves without treatment; large, painful blood collections may be drained. Must differentiate from mela- noma and melanonychia.
c. Nail changes and systemic disease (Figures EC 8.J and EC 8.K)
(1) Clubbing: Complication of chronic lung or heart disease.
(2) Beau lines: Transverse, white lines/grooves that move distally with nail growth; due to growth arrest from systemic illness, medications, or toxins.
(3) Onychomadesis: Accentuated Beau lines often with separation of the nail from base of nail. Usually self-limited and very com- mon following Coxsackie A6 hand, foot, and mouth disease.



 Figure EC 8.D 
Onychomycosis. (From Cohen BA. Disorders of the hair and nails. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:211-239.)


 Figure EC 8.E 
Traumatic subungual hemorrhage. (From Cohen BA. Disorders of the hair and nails. In:
Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:211-239.)



 Figure EC 8.F 
Acral melanoma. (From Cohen BA. Disorders of the hair and nails. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:211-239.)



 Figure EC 8.G 
Melanonychia. (From Cohen BA. Disorders of the hair and nails. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:211-239.)



 Figure EC 8.H 
Nail psoriasis. (From Cohen BA. Disorders of the Hair and Nails. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:211-239.)



 Figure EC 8.I 
Atopic nails. (From Cohen BA. Disorders of the hair and nails. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:211-239.)



 Figure EC 8.J 
Nail clubbing. (From Cohen BA. Disorders of the hair and nails. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:211-239.)


 Figure EC 8.K 
Beau lines. (From Cohen BA. Disorders of the hair and nails. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:211-239.)


2. Congenital/hereditary nail disorders
a. Isolated nail disorders (Figures EC 8.L and EC 8.M)
(1) Congenital nail dystrophy: Clubbing and spooning (koilonychia), may be autosomal dominant with no other anomalies.
(2) Congenital ingrown toenails: Most self-limiting.
b. Genodermatosis and systemic disease (Figures EC 8.N and EC 8.O)
(1) Periungual fibromas: Arise in proximal nail groove, common finding in tuberous sclerosis.
(2) Congenital nail hypoplasia: Can occur with intrauterine exposure to anticonvulsants, alcohol, and warfarin.

 Figure EC 8.L 
Koilonychia. (From Cohen BA. Disorders of the hair and nails. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:211-239.)


 Figure EC 8.M 
Congenital ingrown nails. (From Cohen BA. Disorders of the hair and nails. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:211-239.)



 Figure EC 8.N 
Periungual fibromas. (From Cohen BA. Disorders of the hair and nails. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:211-239.)


 Figure EC 8.O 
Fetal alcohol syndrome with congenital hypoplastic and dysplastic nails. (From Cohen BA. Disorders of the hair and nails. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:211-239.)



 Figure EC 8.P 
Café-au-lait spot. (From Cohen BA. Disorders in pigmentation. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:48-68.)

C. Disorders of Pigmentation30
1. Hyperpigmentation
a. Congenital melanocytic nevi (CMN): Melanocytic nevi that are either present at birth or appear within the first few months of life in 1% to 3% of neonates.31
(1) Appearance: Black or tan in color with irregular borders and often dark terminal hairs.
(2) Risks:
(a) Melanoma-At least 5% of large CMN greater than 20 cm with 70% of this cohort having cancerous transformation by 10 years of age.32 The presence of approximately 20 satellite nevi (smaller congenital nevi) also increases risk of melanoma.
(b) Neurocutaneous melanosis-Children with large, multiple, satellite nevi, or lesions over the spine are at risk for lepto- meningeal involvement with symptoms that may include hydrocephalus and seizures that may require evaluation by gadolinium contrast MRI.33,34
b. Epidermal melanosis: Most lesions appear tan or light brown
(1) Café au lait spots (Figure EC 8.P): Discrete tan macules that appear at birth or during childhood in 10% to 20% of normal individuals, sizes vary from freckles to patches, may involve any



 Figure EC 8.Q 
Acanthosis nigricans, axilla. (From Cohen BA. Disorders in pigmentation. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:48-68.)

 Figure EC 8.R 
Acanthosis nigricans, neck. (From Cohen BA. Disorders in pigmentation. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:48-68.)

site on skin. May be diagnostic marker for Neurofibromatosis type 1 (=6 lesions, each greater than 5 mm in diameter in prepubertal, or greater than 15 mm in postpubertal child) or other syndromes.
(2) Freckles (ephelides): Reddish-tan and brown macules on sun- exposed surfaces, usually 2 to 3 mm in diameter. Serve as an independent risk factor for skin cancers in adulthood and can be an added sign of the importance of photoprotection which may decrease additional lesions.
(3) Acanthosis nigricans (Figures EC 8.Q and EC 8.R): Brown-to- black hyperpigmentation with velvety or warty skin in intertrigi- nous areas, typically found in the skin folds of the neck and



 Figure EC 8.S 
Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. (From Cohen BA. Disorders in pigmentation. In:
Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:48-68.)

axilla. Most commonly occur in obese individuals with insulin resistance at risk for type II diabetes. Finding may decrease after puberty with weight reduction.
c. Dermal melanosis: Slate-gray, dark brown, or bluish-green lesions.
(1) Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation (Figure EC 8.S): Most common cause of increased pigmentation.
(a) Pathogenesis: Follows inflammatory processes in the skin (e.g., diaper dermatitis, insect bites, drug reactions, traumatic injuries).
(b) Clinical features: Localized lesions, follow distribution of resolv- ing disorder. More prominent in darkly pigmented children.
(c) Treatment: Lesions typically fade over several months. Photoprotection is critical with protective clothing and sunscreen of at least SPF 30. Individuals should also avoid physical trauma to areas as well as medications that may worsen hyperpigmentation. Intervention with medication is not always required; however, when it is, hydroquinone is first-line therapy.35
(2) Acquired nevomelanocytic nevi (aka pigmented nevi or moles) (Figure EC 8.T)
(a) Pathogenesis: Develop in early childhood as flat lesions called junctional nevi, then develop into compound nevi when nevus cells migrate into the dermis and lesions enlarge and become papular.
(b) Clinical features: Increase in darkness, size, and number dur- ing puberty; generally do not exceed 5 mm and retain regular- ity in color, texture, and symmetry; on sun-exposed areas.
(c) Treatment: Excision unnecessary, unless cosmetic concern.



 Figure EC 8.T 
Compound nevomelanocytic nevus. (From Cohen BA. Disorders in pigmentation. In:
Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:48-68.)

(d) Changes associated with development of melanoma: See ABCDEs of Melanoma as well as burning, itching, or redness.
(3) Melanomas (Figure EC 8.U)
(a) Pathogenesis: May occur de novo or within acquired or congenital nevi.
(b) Epidemiology: High lifetime risk in those with presence of multiple, large, and irregularly pigmented, bordered, tex- tured nevi and family history of malignant melanomas.
(c) Management: Children in high-risk families must be care- fully observed for atypical nevi development especially in adolescence. Changing nevi with unusual appearance or an "ugly duckling" (mole that is different from all other moles) must be considered for biopsy.
(d) ABCDEs of Melanoma: Criteria for older children and adults is as follows: Asymmetric shape, Borders that are irregular, Color that is variable throughout lesion, Diameter greater than the size of a pencil eraser (>6 mm), Evolution (change is the most important factor in melanoma diagnosis).36 Pediatric patients up to age 20 have their own ABCD criteria: Amelanotic,
Bleeding, Bump, Color uniformity, De novo, any Diameter.37
(4) Melanonychia (see Figure EC 8.G): Darkened nail pigment that most commonly is caused by melanin or hemosiderin deposits in the nail plate. Regular, organized longitudinal lines tend to be benign whereas irregularities are associated with nail melanoma
in adults. However, nail matrix nevi in children often have features that would be considered red flags in the adult population; thus,







 Figure EC 8.U 
Melanoma. (From Cohen BA. Disorders in pigmentation. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:48-68.)



 Figure EC 8.V 
Pigmented spitz nevus. (From Cohen BA. Disorders in pigmentation. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:48-68.)

these criteria may not be applied to children. There are no pediat- ric specific guidelines for management. Typically, this clinical find- ing is due to nail matric nevi. Nail melanomas are very rare though children with this clinical finding warrant close follow up.38,39
(5) Spitz nevus (aka spindle and epithelial cell nevus) (Figure EC 8.V): Innocent nevomelanocytic nevus often confused with malignant melanoma.
(a) Clinical features: Rapidly growing, dome-shaped, red or reddish-brown papules or nodules on face or lower extremi- ties that reach full size quickly.
(b) Management: Observe if features of innocent acquired nevus are present. Consider referral to pediatric dermatology if unusual atypical features present.
2. Hypopigmentation and depigmentation
a. Localized hypopigmentation
(1) Hypopigmented macules (Figure EC 8.W)
(a) Epidemiology: 0.1% to 0.5% of normal newborns have a single hypopigmented macule but it may be a marker for tuberous sclerosis as 70% to 90% of those affected have such macules on the trunk at birth.
(b) Clinical features: Trunk involvement is most com-
mon. Majority are lancet or ash-leaf shaped, but may be round, oval, dermatomal, segmental, or irregularly shaped. Vary from pinpoint confetti spots to large
patches (>10 cm).



 Figure EC 8.W 
Congenital hypopigmented macule. (From Cohen BA. Disorders in pigmentation. In:
Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:48-68.)

(c) Diagnosis: Wood lamp helpful in lightly pigmented children.
(d) Management: In those where systemic disease is suspected, close observation for other cutaneous findings and systemic symptoms is indicated.
(2) Post-inflammatory hypopigmentation (Figure EC 8.X)
(a) Pathogenesis: May appear after an inflammatory skin condition.
(b) Clinical features: Seen in association with primary lesions of underlying disorder (such as atopic dermatitis). Patches usually variable in size and irregularly shaped. Concomitant hyperpigmentation is common.
b. Diffuse hypopigmentation
(1) Albinism: Heterogeneous group of inherited disorders manifested by generalized hypopigmentation or depigmentation of skin, eyes, and hair. These individuals should undergo ophthalmologic exami- nation to evaluate for various associated conditions. Sun protection is important as well as regular skin exams.
3. Dyspigmentation
a. Blaschkoid dyspigmentation40: Congenital hypopigmentation and hyperpigmentation along the lines of Blaschko (Figure EC 8.Y).
(1) Patterns of hyper- or hypopigmentation: Whorl shape on trunk, V-shape on the back, waves on the vertex scalp.
(2) Pathogenesis: Blaschko lines occur due to genetic mosaicism.
(3) Children unlikely to have or develop serious extracutaneous involvement.



 Figure EC 8.X 
Postinflammatory hypopigmentation. (From Cohen BA. Disorders in pigmentation. In:
Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:48-68.)


 Figure EC 8.Y 
Blaschkoid dyspigmentation. (From Cohen BA. Disorders in pigmentation. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Saunders Elsevier; 2013:48-68.)


 REFERENCES	
1. ISSVA classification for vascular anomalies. International society for the study of vascular anomalies. Available at: http://www.issva.org/UserFiles/file/ISSVA- Classification-2018.pdf. Accessed September , 2018.
2. Darrow D, Greene A, Mancini A, Nopper A. Diagnosis and management of infantile hemangioma. Pediatrics. 2015;136:e1060.
3. Krowchuk D, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the management of infantile hemangiomas. Pediatrics. 2019;143(1):1-28.
4. Hartemink DA, Chiu YE, Drolet BA, et al. PHACES syndrome: a review. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2009;73:181-187.
5. FDA, pierre fabre pharmaceuticals. hemangeol. 2014. Available at: http://www
.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2014/205410s000lbl.pdf. Accessed September , 2018.
6. Baselga E, Dembowska-Baginska B, Przewratil P, et al. Efficacy of propranolol between 6 and 12 months of age in high-risk infantile hemangioma. Pediatrics. 2018;142(3):e20173866.
7. Bauman NM, McCarter RJ, Guzzetta PC, et al. Propranolol vs prednisolone for symptomatic proliferating infantile hemangiomas: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2014;140(4):323-330.
8. Cohen BA, Rozell-Shannon L. Early diagnosis and intervention of vascular anomalies (infantile hemangiomas and malformations). Pediatric Care Online. Available at: http://pediatriccare.solutions.aap.org. Accessed September , 2018.
9. Kwok CS, Gibbs S, Bennett C. Topical treatment for cutaneous warts. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;9:CD001781.
10. Hicks MI, Elston DM. Scabies. Dermatol Ther. 2009;22:279-292.
11. Andrews MD, Burns M. Common tinea infections in children. Am Fam Physician. 2008;77:1415-1420.
12. Tinea Capitis. In: The Red Book. 31st ed. Itasca: American Academy of Pediatrics; 798-801.
13. Alkhalifah A, Alsantali A, Wang E, et al. Alopecia areata update: part II. Treatment. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2010;62:191-202.
14. Zaenglein AL, Thiboutot DM. Expert committee recommendations for acne management. Pediatrics. 2006;118:1188-1199.
15. Archer CB, Cohen SN, Baron SE. Guidance on the diagnosis and clinical man- agement of acne. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2012;37(suppl 1):1-6.
16. Eichenfield LF, Krakowski AC, Piggott C, et al. Evidence-based recom- mendations for the diagnosis and treatment of pediatric acne. Pediatrics. 2013;131(suppl 3):S163-S186.
17. Kawshima M, Harada S, Loesche C, Miyachi Y. Adapalene gel 0.1% is effective and safe for Japanese patients with acne vulgaris: a randomized, multicenter, investigator-blinded controlled study. J Dermatol Sci. 2008;49(3):241.
18. Graupe K, Cunliffe WJ, Gollnick HP, Zaumseil RP. Efficacy and safety of topical azelaic acid (20 percent cream): an overview of results from European clinical trials and experimental reports. Cutis. 1996;57(suppl 1):20.
19. Pogacar MS, Maver U, Varda NM, Micetc-Turk D. Diagnosis and management of diaper dermatitis in infants with emphasis on skin microbiota in the diaper area. Int J Dermatol. 2018;57:265-275.
20. Alston S, Cohen B, Braun M. Persistent and recurrent tinea corporis in children treated with combination antifungal/corticosteroid agents. Pediatrics. 2003;111:201.


21. McAleer MA, Flohr C, Irvine AD. Management of difficult and severe eczema in childhood. BMJ. 2012;345:e4770.
22. Eichenfield LF, Tom WL, Berger TG, et al. Guidelines of care for the manage- ment of atopic dermatitis. Section 2. Management and treatment of atopic dermatitis with topical therapies. J Am Acad Dernatol. 2014;71(1):116-132.
23. Stein Gold LF, Spelman L, Spellman MC, Hughes MH, Zane LT. A phase 2, ran- domized, controlled, dose-ranging study evaluating crisaborole topical ointment, 0.5% and 2% in adolescents with mild to moderate atopic dermatitis. J Drugs Dermatol. 2015;14(12):1394.
24. Patel TS, Greer SC, Skinner Jr RB. Cancer concerns with topical immunomodu- lators in atopic dermatitis: overview of data and recommendations to clinicians. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2007;8:189-194.
25. Berger TG, Duvic M, Van Voorhees AS, VanBeek MJ, Frieden IJ, American Academy of Dermatology Association Task Force. The use of topical calcineurin inhibitors in dermatology: safety concerns. Report of the American academy of dermatology association task force. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2006;54(5):818.
26. Boquniewicz M, Leung DY. Recent insights into atopic dermatitis and implica- tions for management of infectious complications. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010;125:4-13.
27. Hernandez RG, Cohen BA. Insect bite-induced hypersensitivity and the SCRATCH principles: a new approach to papular urticaria. Pediatrics. 2006;118:e189-e196.
28. Cohen BA. Disorders of the hair and nails. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:211-239.
29. Gupta AK, Mays RR, Versteeg SG, Shear NH, Frielander SF. Onychomycosis in children: safety and efficacy of antifungal agents. Pediatric Dermatology. 2018;35:552-559.
30. Cohen BA. Disorders in pigmentation. In: Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:48-68.
31. Kanada KN, Merin MR, Munden A, Friedlander SF. A prospective study of cuta- neous findings in newborns in the United States: correlation with race, ethnicity, and gestation status using updated classification and nomenclature. J Pediatr. 2012;161(2):240-245.
32. Marghoob AA. Congenital melanocytic nevi. Evaluation and management.
Dermatol Clin. 2002;20:607.
33. Marghoob AA. Number of satellite nevi as a correlate for neurocutaneous melanocytosis in patients with large congenital melanocytic nevi. Journal A.MA. Archives of Dermatology (1960-2012). Vols 140. 2. 171-175.
34. Di Rocco F, Sabatino G, Koutzoglou M, Battaglia D, Caldarelli M, Tamburrini G. Neurocutaneous melanosis. Childs Nerv Syst. 2004;20(1):23.
35. Callender VD, St Surin-Lord S, Davis EC, Maclin M. Postinflammatory hyper- pigmentation: etiologic and therapeutic considerations. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2011;12(2):87.
36. American Academy of Dermatology. Available at: https://www.aad.org/public/spot-skin-cancer/learn-about-skin- cancer/detect/what-to-look-for. Accessed September , 2018.
37. Cordoro KM, Gupta D, Frieden IJ, McCalmont T, Kashani-Sabet M. Pediatric melanoma: results of a large cohort study and proposal for modified ABCD detection criteria for children. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2013;68(6):913-925.
38. Thomas L, Dalle S. Dermoscopy provides useful information for the manage- ment of melanonychia striata. Dermatol Ther. 2007;20(1):3-10.


39. Piraccini BM, Dika E, Fanti PA. Tips for diagnosis and treatment of nail pigmen- tation with practical algorithm. Dermatol Clin. 2015;33(2):185-195.
40. Cohen J, Shahrokh K, Cohen B. Analysis of 36 cases of blaschkoid dys- pigmentation: reading between the lines of Blaschko. Pediatr Dermatol. 2014;31(4):471-476.




 FIGURE 8.1 
Infantile hemangioma. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 3rd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2005:126.)

 FIGURE 8.3 
Molluscum contagiosum. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:131.)

 FIGURE 8.2 
Pyogenic granuloma. (From Cohen BA. Dermatology Image Atlas; 2001. http://www.dermatlas.org/.)

 FIGURE 8.5 
Roseola. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:177.)



 FIGURE 8.6 
Herpetic gingivostomatitis. (Modified from Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:106.)

	

 FIGURE 8.7 
Herpes zoster. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:110.)

 FIGURE 8.8 
Varicella. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:108.)





 FIGURE 8.9 
Measles. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:175.)


 FIGURE 8.11 
Scabies. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 3rd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2005:126.)


 FIGURE 8.10 
Fifth disease. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pedi­ atric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Lim- ited; 2013:176.)

 FIGURE 8.12 
Tinea capitis. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 3rd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 1993.)


 FIGURE 8.13 
Kerion. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:218c.)



 FIGURE 8.14 
Tinea corporis. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:96.)




 FIGURE 8.16 
Tinea versicolor. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:99.)





 FIGURE 8.15 
Tinea pedis. (From Cohen BA. Dermatology Image Atlas; 2001. http://www.dermatlas. org/.)

 FIGURE 8.17 
Scarlet fever. (From Cohen BA. Dermatology Image Atlas; 2001. http:// www.dermatlas.org/.)



 FIGURE 8.18 
Telogen effluvium. (From Cohen BA. Dermatology Image Atlas; 2001. http:// www.dermatlas.org/.)



 FIGURE 8.19 
Alopecia areata. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:219.)



 FIGURE 8.20 
Traction alopecia. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:220.)

 FIGURE 8.22 
Erythema toxicum neonatorum. (From Cohen BA. Pediatric Dermatology. 2nd ed.
St Louis: Mosby; 1999:18.)	 FIGURE 8.23 
Transient neonatal pustular
melanosis. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Der­ matology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:20.)




 FIGURE 8.24 
Hyperpigmentation from resolving transient neonatal pustular melanosis. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:20.)

 FIGURE 8.25 
Miliaria rubra. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:21.)



 FIGURE 8.26 
Milia. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:22.)


	

 FIGURE 8.27 
Neonatal acne. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Derma­ tology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:22.)

 FIGURE 8.28 
Seborrheic dermatitis. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:32.)



 FIGURE 8.29 
Seborrheic dermatitis. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:32.)

 FIGURE 8.30 
Diaper candidiasis. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:33.)







 FIGURE 8.31 
Allergic contact dermatitis. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:77.)






 FIGURE 8.33 
Infantile eczema. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 3rd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2005:79.)






 FIGURE 8.32 
Poison ivy. (From Cohen BA. Dermatology Image Atlas; 2001. http://www.dermatlas.org/.)

 FIGURE 8.34 
Childhood eczema. (From Cohen BA. Dermatology Image Atlas; 2001. http:// www.dermatlas.org/.)




 FIGURE 8.35 
Nummular eczema. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 3rd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2005:80.)

 FIGURE 8.36 
Follicular eczema. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. China: Elsevier Limited; 2013:83.)





 FIGURE 8.37 
Childhood eczema with lesion in suprapubic area. (From Cohen BA. Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology. 3rd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2005.)


 FIGURE 8.38 
Papular urticaria. (From Cohen BA. Dermatology Image Atlas; 2001. http:// www.dermatlas.org/.)

Chapter 9
Development, Behavior, and Developmental Disability
Brittany Badesch, MD

 See additional content on Expert Consult

 I. DEVELOPMENTAL DEFINITIONS1,2	
A. Developmental Streams
1. Gross Motor Skills: Descriptions of posture and locomotion-in general, how a child moves from one location to another.
2. Fine-Motor and Visual-Motor Problem-Solving Skills: Upper extrem- ity and hand manipulative abilities and hand-eye coordination. These
require an intact motor substrate and a given level of nonverbal cogni- tive ability.
3. Language: The ability to understand and communicate with another person. This is the best predictor of intellectual performance in the absence of a communication disorder or significant hearing impairment.
4. Personal-Social Skills: Communicative in origin; represent the cumula- tive impact of language comprehension and problem-solving skills.
5. Adaptive Skills: Skills concerned with self-help or activities of daily living.
B. Developmental Quotient (DQ)
1. A calculation that reflects the rate of development in any given stream; represents the percentage of normal development present at the time of testing.

DQ = Developmental age
Chronological age

× 100

2. Two separate developmental assessments over time are more predictive of later abilities than a single assessment.
3. In contrast to developmental quotient (DQ), intelligence quotient (IQ) has statistical reliability and validity.2
C. Abnormal Development
1. Delay: Performance significantly below average (DQ <70) in a given area of development. May occur in a single stream or several streams ("global developmental delay").
2. Deviancy: Atypical development within a single stream, such as devel- opmental milestones occurring out of sequence. Deviancy does not necessarily imply abnormality, but should alert one to the possibility that problems may exist.
Example: An infant who rolls at an early age may have abnormally increased tone.

212	Part II Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information

3. Dissociation: A substantial difference in the rate of development between two or more streams.
Example: Increased motor delay relative to cognition seen in some children with cerebral palsy (CP).

 II. GUIDELINES FOR NORMAL DEVELOPMENT AND BEHAVIOR	
A. Developmental Milestones (Table 9.1)
Developmental assessment is based on the premise that milestone acquisi- tion occurs at a specific rate in an orderly and sequential manner.
B. Age-Appropriate Behavioral Issues in Infancy and Early Childhood: See Table 9.2.

A. Developmental Surveillance and Screening Guidelines
1. Developmental surveillance should be included in every well-child visit, and any concerns should be addressed immediately with formal
screening. This includes direct observation of the child and eliciting and attending to the parent's concerns.
2. Standardized developmental screening should be administered at
9-month, 18-month, and 30-month well-child visits, in the absence of developmental concerns. If a 30-month visit is not possible, this screen- ing can be done at the 24-month visit.
3. See full American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) guideline for develop- mental screening algorithm.3
B. Commonly Used Developmental Screening and Assessment Tools: See Table 9.3
C. Identification of Developmental "Red Flags": See Table 9.4
D. Evaluation of Abnormal Development
1. Referral to developmental and appropriate subspecialists.
2. Referral to early intervention services for children aged 0 to 3 years (see Section V).
3. Medical evaluation as outlined in Tables 9.5-9.7.
4. Genetic evaluation (Table 9.8) is warranted for all children with develop- mental delay or intellectual disability (ID) if the cause is not known (e.g., previous traumatic brain injury or neurologic insult).

 IV. SPECIFIC DISORDERS OF DEVELOPMENT	
A. Overview
1. Mental and/or physical impairment(s) that cause significant limitations in functioning.
2. Developmental diagnosis is a functional description; identification of an etiology is important to further inform treatment, prognosis, comorbidi- ties, and future risk.



DEVELOPMENTAL MILESTONES
AgeGross MotorVisual-Motor/Problem-SolvingLanguageSocial/Adaptive1 monthRaises head from proneVisually fixes, follows to midline, hasAlerts to soundRegards facepositiontight grasp2 monthsHolds head in midline, liftsNo longer clenches fists tightly, followsSmiles socially (after being stroked or talked to)Recognizes parentchest off tableobject past midline3 monthsSupports on forearms in proneHolds hands open at rest, follows in circu-Coos (produces long vowel sounds in musicalReaches for familiar people orposition, holds head uplar fashion, responds to visual threatfashion)objects, anticipates feedingsteadily4 monthsRolls over, supports on wrists,Reaches with arms in unison, bringsLaughs, orients to voiceEnjoys looking aroundshifts weighthands to midline6 monthsSits unsupported, puts feet inUnilateral reach, uses raking grasp,Babbles, ah-goo, razz, lateral orientation to bellRecognizes that someone is amouth in supine positiontransfers objectsstranger9 monthsPivots when sitting, crawlsUses immature pincer grasp, probes withSays "mama, dada" indiscriminately, gestures,Starts exploring environment,well, pulls to stand, cruisesforefinger, holds bottle, throws objectswaves bye-bye, understands "no"plays gesture games (e.g.,pat-a-cake)12 monthsWalks aloneUses mature pincer grasp, can make aUses two words other than "mama, dada"Imitates actions, comes whencrayon mark, releases voluntarilyor proper nouns, jargoning (runs severalcalled, cooperates withunintelligible words together with tone ordressinginflection), one-step command with gesture15 monthsCreeps up stairs, walks back-Scribbles in imitation, builds tower of twoUses 4-6 words, follows one-step command15-18 months: uses spoonward independentlyblocks in imitationwithout gestureand cup18 monthsRuns, throws objects fromScribbles spontaneously, builds tower ofMature jargoning (includes intelligible words),Copies parent in tasksstanding without falling	three blocks, turns two or three pages	7-10-word vocabulary, knows five body parts	(sweeping, dusting), plays in
at a time	company of other childrenContinued






DEVELOPMENTAL MILESTONES
AgeGross MotorVisual-Motor/Problem-SolvingLanguageSocial/Adaptive24 monthsWalks up and down stepsImitates stroke with pencil, builds towerUses pronouns (I, you, me) inappropriately,Parallel playwithout helpof seven blocks, turns pages one at afollows two-step commands, 50-wordtime, removes shoes, pants, etc.vocabulary, uses two-word sentences3 yearsCan alternate feet going upCopies a circle, undresses completely,Uses minimum of 250 words, three-wordGroup play, shares toys, takessteps, pedals tricycledresses partially, dries hands ifsentences, uses plurals, knows all pronouns,turns, plays well with others,reminded, unbuttonsrepeats two digitsknows full name, age, gender4 yearsHops, skips, alternates feetCopies a square, buttons clothing,Knows colors, says song or poem from memory,Tells "tall tales," plays coopera-going down stepsdresses self completely, catches ballasks questionstively with a group of children5 yearsSkips alternating feet, jumpsCopies triangle, ties shoes, spreadsPrints first name, asks what a word meansPlays competitive games, abidesover low obstacleswith knifeby rules, likes to help inhousehold tasksFrom Capute AJ, Biehl RF. Functional developmental evaluation: prerequisite to habilitation. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1973;20:3; Capute AJ, Accardo PJ. Linguistic and auditory milestones during the first two years of life: a language inventory for the practitioner. Clin Pediatr. 1978;17:847; and Capute AJ, Shapiro BK, Wachtel RC, et al. The Clinical Linguistic and Auditory Milestone Scale (CLAMS): identification of cognitive defects in motor delayed children. Am J Dis Child. 1986;140:694. Rounded norms from Capute AJ, Palmer FB, Shapiro BK, et al. Clinical Linguistic and Auditory Milestone Scale: prediction of cognition in infancy. Dev Med Child Neurol. 1986;28:762.



AGE-APPROPRIATE BEHAVIORAL ISSUES IN INFANCY AND EARLY CHILDHOOD
AgeBehavioral IssueSymptomsGuidance1-3 monthsColicParoxysms of fussiness/crying, =3 per day, =3 days/Crying usually peaks at 6 weeks and resolves by 3-4 months. Prevent overstimu-week, may pull knees up to chest, pass flatuslation; swaddle infant; use white noise, swing, or car rides to soothe. Avoidmedication and formula changes. Encourage breaks for the primary caregiver.3-4 monthsTrained nightNight awakeningComfort quietly, avoid reinforcing behavior (i.e., avoid night feeds). Do not playfeedingat night. Introducing cereal or solid food does not reduce awakening. Developa consistent bedtime routine. Place baby in bed while drowsy and not fullyasleep.9 monthsStranger anxiety/Distress when separated from parent or approachedUse a transitional object (e.g., special toy, blanket). Use routine or ritual to separateseparationby a strangerfrom parent. May continue until 24 months but can reduce in intensity.anxietyDevelopmentalSeparation anxiety at nightKeep lights off. Avoid picking child up or feeding. May reassure verbally at regularnight wakingintervals or place a transitional object in crib.12 monthsAggressionBiting, hitting, kicking in frustrationSay "no" with negative facial cues. Begin time out (1 minute/year of age). No eyecontact or interaction, place in a nonstimulating location. May restrain child

Need for limit setting

gently until cooperation is achieved.
Exploration of environment, danger of injury	Avoid punishing exploration or poor judgment. Emphasize child-proofing and distraction.



24 months	Toilet training	Child needs to demonstrate readiness: shows interest,
neurologic maturity (i.e., recognizes urge to urinate or defecate), ability to walk to bathroom and undress self, desire to please/imitate parents, increasing periods of daytime dryness

Age range for toilet training is usually 2-4 years. Give guidance early; may
introduce potty seat but avoid pressure or punishment for accidents. Wait until the child is ready. Expect some periods of regression, especially with stressors.


Continued







AGE-APPROPRIATE BEHAVIORAL ISSUES IN INFANCY AND EARLY CHILDHOOD
AgeBehavioral IssueSymptomsGuidance24-36 monthsNew siblingRegression, aggressive behaviorAllow for special time with parent, 10-20 min daily of one-on-one time exclusively devoted to the older sibling(s). Child chooses activity with parent. No interrup-
tions. May not be taken away as punishment.36 months	Nightmares	Awakens crying, may or may not complain of bad dream	Reassure child, explain that he or she had a bad dream. Leave bedroom door
open, use a nightlight, demonstrate there are no monsters under the bed. Discuss dream the following day. Avoid scary movies or television shows.

Night terrors	Agitation, screaming 1-2 hours after going to bed.
Child may have eyes open but not respond to parent. May occur at same time each night


From Dixon SD, Stein MT. Encounters With Children: Pediatric Behavior and Development. St Louis: Mosby; 2000.

May be familial, not volitional.
Prevention: For several nights, awaken child 15 min before terrors typically occur. Avoid overtiredness.
Acute: Be calm; speak in soft, soothing, repetitive tones; help child return to sleep. Protect child against injury.





DEVELOPMENTAL SCREENING TESTS BY DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis EvaluatedScreening TestAgeCompleted byCommentsWeblinkCognitive and motor developmentAges and Stages Questionnaire (ASQ)4-60 monthsParentIncreased time efficiency (can fill out while waiting)
Documents milestones that arewww.agesandstages.comdifficult to assess in the officeDevelopmental and behavioral problemsParents' Evaluation of Developmental Status (PEDS)0-8 yearsParentMay also be useful as a surveillance toolwww.pedstest.comLanguage, problem- solving developmentCapute Scales: Clinical Linguistic and Auditory Milestone Scale (CLAMS), Clinical Adaptive Test (CAT)3-36 monthsClinicianGive quantitative DQs for language (CLAMS) and visual-motor/problem- solving (CAT) abilitieshttp://www.brookespu blishing.com/resou
rce-center/screening-and- assessment/the-capute-
scales/Autism spectrum disordersModified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers, Revised with Follow-Up (M-CHAT-R/F)
Communication and Symbolic Behavior16-30 months


6-24 monthsParent


ParentPositive screens require clinician follow-up

The Infant Toddler Checklist is awww.m-chat.org


www.brookespublishing.com/cScales and Developmental Profile (CSBS DP; Infant Toddler Checklist)one-page questionnaire that is part of a larger standardized screening tool (CSBS DP)hecklist.pdf


Childhood Autism Screening Test (CAST)

Can be used in patients as young as 6 months
4-11 years	Parent	Only screening tool evaluated in
preschool population



http://www.autismresearchce ntre.com/project_9_cast


Modified from American Academy of Pediatrics. Identifying infants and young children with developmental disorders in the medical home: an algorithm for developmental surveillance and screening. Pediatrics. 2006;118:405-420; American Academy of Pediatrics. Identification and evaluation of children with autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics. 2007;120: 1183-1215; Robins DL, Casagrande K, Barton M, et al. Validation of the Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers, Revised with Follow-up (M-CHAT-R/F). Pediatrics. 2014;133:37-45.

218	Part II Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information


DEVELOPMENTAL RED FLAGS
Age of Patient	Red Flag Symptom


5 months (corrected
for gestation)

Not able to hold object placed in hand


12 months	Unable to sit unsupported
24 months	Not walking in female patients

From Bellman M, Byrne O, Sege R. Developmental assessment of children. BMJ. 2013;346:31-36.



DEVELOPMENTAL EVALUATION: PERTINENT HISTORY AND PHYSICAL
Past Medical Problems	Trauma Infection Medication

Behavioral History	Social skills
Eye contact Affection
Hyperactivity, impulsivity, inattention, distractibility Self-regulation
Perseveration Worries/avoidance Stereotypies, peculiar habits



DEVELOPMENTAL EVALUATION: PERTINENT HISTORY AND PHYSICAL
Family History	History of developmental disabilities, ADHD, seizures, tics, stillbirths, neonatal death, congenital malformations, mental illness, or recurrent miscarriages
Family members who were late talkers or walkers Family member school performance
Family pedigree (see Chapter 13)
Age-directed Neuro Exam	Cranial nerves
Tone and strength
Postural reactions (Table EC 9.A) Functional abilities
Reflexes [including primitive reflexes for infants (Table 9.6)]





PRIMITIVE REFLEXES
Primitive ReflexesElicitationResponseTimingMoro reflexSupine: Sudden neckExtension, adduction,Present at birth; disap-("embrace"extension; allow headand then abduc-pears by 3-6 monthsresponse) ofto fall back about 3 cmtion of UEs, withfingers, wrists,semiflexionand elbowsGalant reflex (GR)Prone suspension:
Stroking paravertebralProduces truncal incurvature withPresent at birth; disap- pears by 2-6 monthsarea from thoracic toconcavity towardsacral regionstimulated sideAsymmetricalSupine: Rotate headRelative extensionPresent at birth; disap-tonic neck reflexlaterally about 45-90of limbs on chinpears by 4-9 months(ATNR, "fencer"degreesside and flexion onresponse)occiput sideSymmetrical tonicSitting: Head extension/Extension of UEsAppears at 5 months; notneck reflexflexionand flexion of LEs/present in most normal(STNR, "cat"flexion of UEs and LEchildren; disappearsreflex)extensionby 8-9 monthsTonic labyrinthineSupine: Extension of theTonic extension of trunkPresent at birth; disap-supine (TLS)neck (alters relation ofand LEs, shoulderpears by 6-9 monthsthe labyrinths)retraction andadduction, usuallywith elbow flexionContinued


POSTURAL REACTIONS
Postural Reaction	Age of Appearance	Description	Importance
Head righting	6 weeks-3 months	Lifts chin from table top Necessary for

in prone position

Landau response	2-3 months	Extension of head, then
trunk and legs when held prone
Derotational righting	4-5 months	Following passive or
active head turning, body rotates to follow direction of head
Anterior propping	4-5 months	Arm extension anteriorly
in supported sitting
Parachute	5-6 months	Arm extension when falling
Lateral propping	6-7 months	Arm extension laterally
in protective response

adequate head control and sitting
Early measure of developing trunk control
Prerequisite to inde- pendent rolling


Necessary for tripod sitting
Facial protection when falling
Allows independent sitting



Modified from Milani-Comparetti A, Gidoni EA. Routine developmental examination in normal and retarded children. Dev Med Child Neurol. 1967;9:631-638; Capute AJ. Early neuromotor reflexes in infancy. Pediatr Ann. 1986;15:217-218, 221-223, 226; Capute AJ, Palmer FB, Shapiro BK, et al. Primitive reflex profile: a quantitation of primitive reflexes in infancy. Dev Med Child Neurol. 1984;26:375-383; and Palmer FB, Capute AJ. Developmental disabilities. In: Oski FA, ed. Principles and Practice of Pediatrics. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott; 1994.

219.e2	Part II Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information


15 months	Imitates scribble
18 months	Scribbles spontaneously 2 years	Imitates stroke
21/2 years	Differentiates horizontal and vertical stroke






3 yr	4 yr	41/2 yr

5 yr	6 yr	6 yr





7 yr

8 yr

9 yr






11 yr

Gesell Figures. (From Illingsworth RS. The Development of the Infant and Young Child, Normal and Abnormal. 5th ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1972:229-232; and Cattel P. The Measurement of Intelligence of Infants and Young Children. New York: Psychological Corporation; 1960:97-261.)







15 mo

18 mo



2 yr






21/2 yr

3 yr






3 yr	4 yr









6 yr

 FIGURE EC 9.B 
Gesell Block Skills. (From Capute AJ, Accardo PJ. The Pediatrician and the Developmentally Disabled Child: A Clinical Textbook on Mental Retardation. Baltimore: University Park Press; 1979:122.)

220	Part II Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information


PRIMITIVE REFLEXES
Primitive ReflexesElicitationResponseTimingTonic labyrinthineProne: Flexion ofActive flexion of trunkPresent at birth; disap-prone (TLP)the neckwith protraction ofpears by 6-9 monthsshouldersPositive supportVertical suspension:Neonatal: momentaryPresent at birth; disap-reflex (PSR)Bouncing hallucalLE extension followedpears by 2-4 monthsareas on firm surfaceby flexionMature: extension of LEs and support ofAppears by 6 monthsbody weightStepping reflex (SR,
walking reflex)Vertical suspension:
Hallucal stimulationStepping gaitDisappears by 2-3
monthsCrossed extensionProne: HallucalInitial flexion, adduc-Present at birth; disap-reflex (CER)stimulation of LE in fulltion, then extensionpears by 9 monthsextensionof contralateral limbPlantar graspStimulation of hallucalPlantar flexion graspPresent at birth; disap-areaspears by 9 monthsPalmar graspStimulation of palmPalmar graspPresent at birth; disap-pears by 9 monthsLower extremity
placing (LEP)Vertical suspension:
Rubbing tibia orInitial flexion, then
extension, then plac-Appears at 1 daydorsum of foot againsting of LE on table topedge of table topUpper extremityRubbing lateral surface ofFlexion, extension, thenAppears at 3 monthsplacing (UEP)forearm along edge ofplacing of hand ontable top from elbow totable topwrist to dorsal handDownward thrust (DT)Vertical suspension:
Thrust LEs downwardFull extension of LEsAppears at 3 monthsLE, Lower extremity; UE, upper extremity.


DEVELOPMENTAL EVALUATION: INITIAL LABS AND OTHER STUDIES
Neuroimaging	Consider if abnormal neurologic exam, concern about head circum-
ference growth velocity, or global developmental delay present
Laboratory studies	Consider CBC, CMP, lead level, CK, TSH based on history and exam
Confirm newborn screen results
CBC, Complete blood count; CK, creatine kinase; CMP, complete metabolic panel; TSH, thyroid stimulating hormone.


DEVELOPMENTAL EVALUATION: GENETIC WORK-UP


Fragile X testing	Should be performed in all boys and girls with GDD/ID of unknown cause.
Of boys with GDD/ID of unknown cause, 2%-3% will have fragile X




DEVELOPMENTAL EVALUATION: GENETIC WORK-UP


The tests discussed above do not require referral to a genetic specialist and can be ordered by the patient's pediatrician as a part of the evaluation of global developmental delay/intellectual
disability (GDD/ID). If unrevealing and severe DD/ID present, refer to genetic specialist for consid- eration of additional testing such as metabolic testing or whole exome sequencing.

From Moeschler JB, Shevell M. Comprehensive evaluation of the child with intellectual disability or global developmental delays. Pediatrics. 2014;134(3):e903-e918.


3. School- and home-based programs are helpful interventions for all developmental disorders (see Section V).
B. Intellectual Disability
1. Definition and Epidemiology
a. Deficits in general mental abilities
b. Affects approximately 1% of the population4
2. Clinical Presentation
a. Delay in milestones (motor, language, social)
b. Academic difficulty
c. Identifiable features of known associated genetic syndrome (e.g., Trisomy 21, fragile X, Rett syndrome)
3. Diagnosis
a. Diagnostic criteria: (1) deficits in intellectual functioning, (2) deficits in adaptive functioning, (3) onset of these deficits during the devel- opmental period
b. Deficits in adaptive functioning must be in one or more domains of activities of daily living.
c. ID is further categorized as mild, moderate, severe, or profound in the DSM-5 based on the degree of functional deficit (Table EC 9.B).
4. Interventions/Treatment
Support, employment, and recreational programs through resources such as The Arc (www.thearc.org).
C. Communication Disorders
1. Definition
a. Deficits in communication, language, or speech
b. Can be subdivided into5:
(1) Receptive/expressive language disorder
(2) Speech sound disorders
(3) Childhood-onset fluency disorder (stuttering)
(4) Social pragmatic communication disorder





SEVERITY LEVELS FOR INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
Severity Level	Conceptual Domain	Social Domain

Mild	For preschool children, there may be no obvious conceptual differences. For school-aged children and adults, there are difficulties in learning academic skills involving reading, writing, arithmetic, time, or money, with support needed in one or more areas to meet age-related expecta- tions. In adults, abstract thinking, executive function (i.e., planning, strategizing, priority setting, and cognitive flexibility), and short-term memory, as well as functional use of academic skills (e.g., reading, money management) are impaired. There is a somewhat concrete approach to problems and solutions compared with age mates.
Moderate	All through development, the individual's conceptual skills lag markedly behind those of peers. For preschoolers, language and preacademic skills may develop slowly. For school-aged children, progress in reading, writing, mathematics, and understanding of time and money occurs slowly across the school years, and is markedly limited compared with that of peers. For adults, academic skill development is typically at an elementary level, and support is required for all use of academic skills in work and personal life. Ongoing assistance on a daily basis is needed to complete conceptual tasks of day-to-day life,
and others may take over these responsibilities fully for the individual.

Compared with typically developing age mates, the individual is immature in social interactions (e.g., difficulty in accurately perceiving peers' social cues).
Communication, conversation, and language are more concrete or immature than expected for age. There may be difficulties regulating emotion and behavior in age-appropriate fashion; these difficulties are noticed by peers in social situa- tions. There is limited understanding of risk in social situations; social judgment is immature for age, and the person is at risk of being manipulated by others (gullibility).

The individual shows marked differences from peers in social and communicative behavior across development. Spoken language is typically a primary tool for social communication, but is much less complex than that of peers. Capacity for relationships is evident in ties to family and friends, and the individual may have successful friendships across life and sometimes romantic relations in adulthood. However, individuals may not perceive or interpret social cues accurately. Social judgment and decision-making abilities are limited, and caretakers must assist the person with life decisions. Friendships with typically developing peers are often
affected by communication or social limitations. Significant social and communica- tive support is needed in work settings for success.

Continued







SEVERITY LEVELS FOR INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
Severity Level	Conceptual Domain	Social Domain

Severe	Attainment of conceptual skills is limited. The individual generally has little understanding of written language or of concepts involving num- bers, quantity, time, and money. Caretakers provide extensive support for problem solving throughout life.


Profound	Conceptual skills generally involve the physical world rather than symbolic processes. The individual may use objects in goal-directed fashion for self-care, work, and recreation. Certain visuospatial skills (e.g., matching and sorting based on physical characteristics) may be acquired. However, co-occurring motor and sensory impairments may prevent functional use of objects.

Spoken language is quite limited in terms of vocabulary and grammar. Speech may be single words or phrases, and may be supplemented through augmentative means. Speech and communication are focused on the here and now within everyday events. Language is used for social communication more than for explication.
Individuals understand simple speech and gestural communication. Relationships with family members and familiar others are a source of pleasure and help.
The individual has very limited understanding of symbolic communication in speech or gesture. He or she may understand some simple instructions or gestures. The individual expresses his or her own desires and emotions largely through nonverbal, nonsymbolic communication. The individual enjoys relationships with well-known family members, caretakers, and familiar others, and initiates and responds to social interactions through gestural and emotional cues. Co-occurring sensory and physical impairments may prevent many social activities.


Reprinted with permission from the American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Arlington: APA; 2013.

222	Part II Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information

c. Differential diagnosis includes ID, hearing loss, significant motor impairment, or severe mental health difficulties.
2. Interventions/Treatment
Referrals to speech-language pathology (SLP), audiology
D. Learning Disabilities4
1. Definition
A heterogeneous group of deficits in an individual's ability to perceive or process information efficiently and accurately.
2. Diagnosis
a. Achievement on standardized tests that is substantially below expected for age, schooling, and level of intelligence in one or more of the following areas: basic reading skills, reading comprehension, reading fluency skills, oral expression, listening comprehension, written expression, mathematic calculation, and mathematic problem solving.
b. There is no alternative diagnosis such as sensory impairment or ID.6,7
3. Interventions/Treatment
School-based services through IEPs and 504 plans tailored to specific learning needs.
E. Cerebral Palsy (CP)
1. Definition and Epidemiology
a. A group of disorders of the development of movement and posture attributed to non-progressive disturbances that occurred in the developing fetal or infant brain.8
b. Prevalence: 2 to 3/1000 live births2
2. Clinical Presentation
a. Delayed motor development, abnormal tone, atypical postures, persistent primitive reflexes past 6 months.
b. History of known or suspected brain injury.
c. Manifestations may change with brain maturation and development.
3. Diagnosis
a. Classification is based on physiologic and topographic characteristics as well as severity (Table 9.9).9
b. Brain imaging should be obtained with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); abnormal in 70% to 90% of individuals with CP.10
4. Interventions/Treatment
a. Baseline and ongoing medical subspecialty care, including develop- mental pediatrics, neurology, orthopedics, and neurosurgery.
b. Interdisciplinary team involvement (see Section V).
c. Equipment to promote mobility and communication, including Augmentative and Alternative Communication - any form of com- munication other than oral speech (Table EC 9.C).11
(1) Augmentative Communication: Communication supports/meth- ods used by individuals who have some speech but limited use of their speech.




TYPES OF ALTERNATIVE AND AUGMENTATIVE COMMUNICATION
Type of AAC	Description	Formats	Access Method

Low-tech AAC	Generally paper-based supports
Messages represented by gestures, symbols/photos, objects, words, phrases, or spelling with letters


Mid-tech AAC	Generally non-computer-based devices with recordable/digi- tized speech
Messages represented by symbols/photos, words, phrases
No spelling options; device can't blend letters together to make a spoken word
May require physical dexterity to change pages
Generally, more limited vocabulary possibilities as compared to high-tech AAC
High-tech AAC	Computer-based devices with synthesized or digitized speech Messages could be represented by symbols, photos, words,
phrases, or spelling
Over 40 different picture-based vocabulary setups are available on the market, to match to patients' language and access needs

Basic signs, pencil/paper (writing), eye pointing board, communication board or book, Velcro/ magnet/pull-off messages


Single button with single message or multiple messages to scan through
Multi-level devices with changeable paper overlay Single level device with non-changing vocabulary
overlay



Tablet/smartphone/smart watch with AAC application
Dedicated speech generating devices, talking word processor
Non-dedicated/integrated devices with computer access options

Direct selection with upper extremities/ stylus/laser pointer/head-stick/ mouth-stick/eye pointing
Indirect selection with partner assisted scanning
Direct selection with fingers/hand// stylus/laser pointer/head-stick/ mouth-stick
Indirect selection with switch scanning




Direct selection with fingers/hand/sty- lus/laser pointer/head-stick/mouth- stick/eye pointing/mouse
Indirect selection with switch scanning

From personal communication with Tooley, Lauren M.S., CCC-SLP, Kennedy Krieger Institute and from Augmentative and Alternative Communication. American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, https://www.asha.or g/PRPSpecificTopic.aspx?folderid=8589942773&section=Key_Issues.




CLINICAL CLASSIFICATION OF CEREBRAL PALSY9
Type	Pattern of Involvement

Bilateral spasticity	Diplegia (legs primarily affected)
Quadriplegia (all four extremities impaired; legs worse than arms)
II. DYSKINETIC (LEAD-PIPE OR CANDLE-WAX RIGIDITY, VARIABLE TONE, ± CLONUS)

III. OTHER
Hypotonic	Usually related to diffuse, often severe cerebral and/or cerebellar cortical dysfunction. May be axial, appendicular, or generalized.

From Graham HK, Rosenbaum P, et al. Cerebral palsy. Nat Rev Disease Primers. 2016;2(15082).

(2) Alternative Communication: Communication supports/methods used by individuals who have no speech.
d. Pharmacotherapy for spasticity (e.g., botulinum toxin injections, baclofen), dyskinesia, hypersalivation (e.g., glycopyrrolate, scopol- amine patch).12
e. In carefully selected patients: Intrathecal baclofen, selective dorsal rhizotomy, deep brain stimulation.
F. Autism Spectrum Disorders
1. Definition and Epidemiology
a. Encompasses previously named disorders of autistic disorder (autism), Asperger disorder, childhood disintegrative disorder, and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS).
b. Increasing prevalence: 1 in 59 children in the United States has an autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in 2018.13,14
c. Almost five times more common in males than females.13
2. Screening
a. Formal screening for ASD recommended at the 18- and 24- month visits (see the AAP practice guidelines for more detailed recommendations).15
b. Recommendation upheld by the AAP despite a U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) draft recommendation statement cit- ing insufficient evidence for screening.16,17
c. Evaluate using screening tools such as the Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT-R/F) and Childhood Autism Screening Test (CAST) (see Table 9.4)


3. Diagnosis
a. Symptoms vary by age, developmental level, language ability, and supports in place.
b. Diagnostic criteria include4:
(1) Impaired social communication and interaction.
Examples: Lack of joint attention behaviors (e.g., showing toys, pointing for showing), diminished eye contact, no sharing of emotions, lack of imitation
(2) Restricted repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities. Examples: Simple motor stereotypies (hand flapping, finger flicking), repetitive use of objects (spinning coins, lining up toys), repetitive speech (echolalia), resistance to change, unusual sensory responses
(3) Presentation in early childhood and significant limitation of functioning.
4. Interventions/Treatment
a. Educational interventions, visual supports, naturalistic developmental behavioral interventions (integrating behavioral and child-responsive strategies to teach developmentally appropriate skills in a more natu- ral and interactive setting).16,17
b. Referral to SLP, OT/sensory-based interventions.
G. Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: See Chapter 24

A. Interdisciplinary Involvement
1. Neurodevelopmental pediatrician, child neurologist, developmental/ behavioral pediatrician, other medical subspecialties as indicated (e.g., orthopedics for CP can be very important).
2. Genetic counseling for families of children with a genetic condition.
3. Psychologists for formal testing, counseling.
4. Rehabilitation and therapists, including physical therapy (PT), occupa- tional therapy (OT), and SLP.
5. Educators
B. Relevant Laws and Regulation
1. The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) sets forth regulations in the following areas for states that receive federal funding6,18:
a. Entitles all children with qualifying disabilities to a free and appropriate public education in the least restrictive environment.
b. Early intervention services: Infants and toddlers younger than
3 years may be referred for evaluation to receive developmental services. Eligibility criteria vary by state; see The National Early Childhood Technical Assistance Center (www.ectacenter.org) for details.


c. Qualifying disabilities: Children aged 3 to 21 years with autism spec- trum disorder, ID, specific learning disability (LD), hearing or visual impairment, speech or language impairment, orthopedic impairment, traumatic brain injury, emotional disturbance, or other health impair- ment are eligible.
d. Individualized Education Program (IEP): Written statement that includes a child's current capabilities, goals and how they will be measured, and services required. A comprehensive team is needed to develop and implement the IEP.
e. Transition Services: School systems must provide transitions services that prepare students for post-secondary activities and IEPs must include a statement of transition service needs starting no later than age 14. The student must be included in the IEP process starting at age 14.
2. Head Start and Early Head Start: Programs instituted by the federal government to promote school readiness of low-income children aged 3 to 5 years and younger than 3 years, respectively, within their communities.19
3. Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) prohibit discrimination against individuals with any disability, more broadly defined as an impairment that limits function.20

A. The Need
Research reveals health disparities between adults with developmental dis- abilities and those without. Disparities include:
1. Increased ED utilization
2. Lack of identified adult provider
3. Worse self-perception of health21
B. The Role of the Pediatric Provider
AAP Consensus Statement on Transitions22,23:
1. Identify a health professional as point person to work with the youth and family on transition process.
2. Create health care transition plan by age 14 with the youth and family.
3. Apply same guidelines for primary and preventive care for all adoles- cents and young adults.
4. Ensure affordable, continuous insurance coverage.
C. Transition Domains
Transitions for young adults with disabilities occur across many domains of life and warrant support from an interdisciplinary team (Table 9.10).




TRANSITION DOMAINS FOR YOUTH WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS AND DISABILITIES

Transition Domain
Common IssuesNecessary Support Personnel/ ServicesPhysical/EmotionalDifficulty identifying adult providers,Pediatrician, adult PCP,Healthretained in pediatric care, lost tosub-specialistsfollow-up, increased ED usage,insurance difficultiesEducation/Education services through IDEAEducational team members (teach-Employmentend at 21 years old. Subsequenters, therapists), vocationaldifficulty finding and engaging inrehab specialists, collegepost-secondary education and/orcounselors, post-secondaryemployment opportunities.education programsLegal/FinancialDifficulties with issues of SSI,Attorney, legal counsel, familyguardianship, conservatorshipadvocateHousing/Access to accessible housing andLife skills courses, group homes,Transportationtransportation, development andindependent living supports/ongoing support of skills needsaides, resources through statefor independent livingdepartments of disability andthe US Department of Housingand Urban Development, statemobility servicesLeisure Pursuits/Decreased structure of leisure pur-Day programs, social engagementRespite Caresuits with termination of schoolprograms (e.g., Best Buddies,services at 21, increased burdenSpecial Olympics), respite careon caregiversservices for caregiversSexualityRomantic and sexual relationships,Education team members (sexualvulnerability, reproductive rights,education while in school), fam-contraception, parenthood,ily members; OB/Gyn providers,access to appropriate screeningadult healthcare providersand health careED, Emergency department; IDEA, Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; OB/Gyn, obstetrician/gynecologist; PCP, primary care physician; SSI, supplemental security income.


 VII. WEB RESOURCES	
• Autism Speaks: www.autismspeaks.org
• Bright Futures: www.brightfutures.org
• Cerebral Palsy Foundation: yourcpf.org
• Disability Programs and Services: https://www.dol.gov/odep/topics/ disability.htm
• Got Transition: www.gottransition.org
• Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA): idea.ed.gov
• Intellectual Disability: aaidd.org
• National Center for Learning Disabilities: www.ncld.org
• National Early Childhood Technical Assistance Center:
www.ectacenter.org
• Reach Out and Read: www.reachoutandread.org

 REFERENCES	
A complete list of references can be found online at www.expertconsult.com.

Chapter 9  Development, Behavior, and Developmental	227.e1

 REFERENCES	
1. Capute AJ, Shapiro BK, Palmer FB. Spectrum of developmental disabilities: continuum of motor dysfunction. Orthop Clin North Am. 1981;12:3-22.
2. Capute A, Accardo P. Developmental disabilities in Infancy and Childhood. 2nd ed. Baltimore: Paul H. Brooks Publishing Co; 1996.
3. American Academy of Pediatrics. Identifying infants and young children with developmental disorders in the medical home: an algorithm for developmental surveillance and screening. Pediatrics. 2006;118:405-420.
4. Shapiro BK, Gallico RP. Learning disabilities. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1993;40:491-505.
5. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: Text Revision. 5th ed. Arlington: APA; 2013.
6. Individuals with Disability Education Improvement Act of 2004, Pub. L. No. 108-445.
7. Rosenbaum P, Paneth N, Leviton A, et al. A report: the definition and classifica- tion of cerebral palsy April 2006. Dev Med Child Neurol Suppl. 2007;109:8-14.
8. Colver A, Fairhurst C, Pharoah PO. Cerebral palsy. Lancet. 2014;383:1240-1249.
9. Liptak GS, Murphy NA. Council on Children with Disabilities. Providing a pri- mary care medical home for children and youth with cerebral palsy. Pediatrics. 2011;128:e1321-e1329.
10. Hoon AH. Neuroimaging in cerebral palsy: patterns of brain dysgenesis and injury. J Child Neurol. 2005;20:936-939.
11. Chazin KT, Quinn ED, Ledford JR. Augmentative and alternative communica- tion (AAC). In: Evidence-Based Instructional Practices for Young Children with Autism and Other Disabilities; 2016.
12. Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network Surveillance Year 2010 Principal Investigators; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder among children aged 8 years-autism and developmental disabilities monitoring network, 11 sites, United States, 2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63:1-21.
13. Johnson CP, Myers SM, American Academy of Pediatrics. Identification and evaluation of children with autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics. 2007;120:1183-1215. Reaffirmed in AAP publications reaffirmed or retired. Pediatrics. 2014;134:e1520.
14. Baio J, Wiggins L, Christensen DL, et al. Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder among children aged 8 years-autism and developmental disabilities monitor- ing network, 11 Sites, United States, 2014. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2018;67(No. SS-6):1-23.
15. Hassink G. AAP Statement on U.S. preventive services task force draft recom- mendation on autism screening. https://www.aap.org/en-us/about-the-aap/aap- press-room/pages/AAP-Statement-on-U-S-Preventive-Services-Task-Force-D raft-Recommendation-Statement-on-Autism-Screening.aspx; 2015. Accessed
September 10, 2015.
16. Schreibman L, Dawson G, Stahmer AC, et al. Naturalistic developmental behavioral interventions: empirically validated treatments for autism spectrum disorder. J Autism Dev Disord. 2015;45(8):2411-2428.
17. Myers SM, Johnson CP. American academy of pediatrics council on children with disabilities. management of children with autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics. 2007;120:1162-1182.
18. Lipkin PH, Okamoto J. Council on children with disabilities and council on school health. the individuals with disabilities education act (IDEA) for children with special educational needs. Pediatrics. 2015;136(6):e1650-e1662.

227.e2	Part II Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information

19. Improving Head Start for School Readiness Act of 2007, Pub. L. No. 110-134.
20. United States. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Office for Civil Rights. Section 504 of the Rehabilitation act of 1973 : Fact Sheet: Handicapped Persons Rights Under Federal law. Washington: Dept. of Health, Education, and Welfare, Office of the Secretary, Office for Civil Rights; 1978.
21. Oswald DP, Gilles DL, Cannady MS, Wenzel DB, Willis JH, Bodurtha JN. Youth with special health care needs: transition to adult health care services. Maternal and child health journal. 2013;17(10):1744-1752. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10995-012-1192-7.
22. American Academy of Pediatrics, American Academy of Family Physicians, American College of Physicians-American Society of Internal Medicine. A con- sensus statement on health care transitions for young adults with special health care needs. Pediatrics. 2002;110(6 pt 2):1304-1306.
23. American Academy of Pediatrics Clinical Report. Supporting the health care transition from adolescence to adulthood in the medical home. Pediatrics. 2018;142(5).
24. Moeschler JB, Shevell M, Committee on Genetics. Comprehensive evaluation of the child with intellectual disability or global developmental delays. Pediatrics. 2014;134:e903-e918.

Chapter 10
Endocrinology
Samar Atteih, MD and Jessica Ratner, MD

 See additional content on Expert Consult

 I. DIABETES	
A. Diagnosis of Diabetes Mellitus1-3
Diagnostic criteria (must meet one of four):
1. Symptoms of diabetes (polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss, frequent yeast infections) and random blood glucose (BG) =200 mg/dL
2. Fasting plasma glucose (FPG = no caloric intake for at least 8 hours)
=126 mg/dL
3. Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) with a 2-hour post-load plasma glucose of =200 mg/dL
4. Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) =6.5%
NOTE: In the absence of symptoms of hyperglycemia, FPG or OGTT should
be repeated on another day.
B. Definition of Increased Risk (Prediabetes)
1. FPG 100 to 125 mg/dL
2. 2-hour post-OGTT 140 to 199 mg/dL
3. HbA1c 5.7% to 6.4%
C. Interpreting Hemoglobin A1c1,2
1. Estimates average BG for the past 3 months.
2. HbA1c of 6% approximately equals an average BG of 130 mg/dL; each additional 1% ˜ 30 mg/dL more.
3. Unreliable in patients with abnormal red cell lifespan or morphology
(e.g., sickle cell disease, spherocytosis).
4. Although the HbA1c criterion has been accepted by the American Diabetes Association for the diagnosis of diabetes in adults, this criterion remains controversial in children, especially as it relates to type 2 diabe- tes mellitus (T2DM).
D. Etiology: Distinguishing Between Types of Diabetes Mellitus1,2
1. Type 1 (T1DM) versus T2DM (most common types, polygenic; Table 10.1)
2. Other forms of diabetes4,5
a. Monogenic diabetes: 1% to 2% of diabetes mellitus (DM). Due to single-gene mutations, typically relating to insulin production or release. Identifying gene can have clinical significance.
(1) Suspect if autosomal dominant inheritance pattern of early-onset (<25 years) DM, insulin independence, absent T2DM phenotype (non-obese), or preservation of C-peptide.
228




CHARACTERISTICS SUGGESTIVE OF TYPE 1 VERSUS TYPE 2 DIABETES
Characteristic	Type 1	Type 2

Polydipsia and polyuria	Present for days to weeks	Absent or present for weeks to
months
Ethnicity	Caucasian	African American, Hispanic, Asian,
Native AmericanWeightWeight lossObese (although weight loss is com- mon in presentation with severe
hyperglycemia)Other physical findingsAcanthosis nigricansFamily historyAutoimmune diseasesType 2 diabetesKetoacidosisMore common (1/3 at onset)Less common (6% at onset)Lab characteristicsAutoantibodies common;
C-peptide generally should be unmeasurable >2 years after diagnosisAutoantibodies less common, but sometimes present
(2) Well-described subtypes: MODY1 and MODY3, due to mutations in transcription factors for insulin production; responsive to sulfonylureas.
b. Neonatal diabetes (NDM): Defined as DM onset <6 months of age.
(1) Rare: 1:160,000 to 260,000 live births, typically a de novo mutation
(2) May be transient (50% recur) or permanent
(3) Subset respond to sulfonylureas
c. Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD): OGTT rather than HbA1c is the recommended screening test.
d. Other causes of DM: Diseases of exocrine pancreas due to pancreati- tis, trauma, infection, invasive disease (e.g., hemochromatosis).
E. Screening for Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus1,6
1. Who to screen: Children who are overweight [body mass index (BMI)
>85th percentile] and have one or more of the following risk factors:
a. Maternal history of diabetes or gestational diabetes mellitus during child's gestation
b. Family history of T2DM in a first- or second-degree relative
c. Race/ethnicity: African American, Native American, Hispanic, Asian, or Pacific Islander
d. Signs associated with insulin resistance (acanthosis nigricans, hypertension, dyslipidemia, polycystic ovarian syndrome, or small- for-gestational-age birth weight)
2. How to screen: Fasting plasma glucose, OGTT, or HbA1c
3. When to screen: Begin at the age of 10 years or at the onset of puberty (whichever occurs first), and repeat at a minimum of every 3 years or more often if BMI is increasing.




SUBCUTANEOUS INSULIN DOSING

Insulin
Dose CalculationSample Calculation for 24-kg Child
DoseTotal daily0.5-1 unit/kg/day0.75 × 24 = 18 units/18 unitsdosedayBasalGlargine1/2 daily total1/2 × 18 units = 99 units dailyOR
Detemir
1/2 daily total
1/2 × 18 units = 9
4.5 units BID÷ BIDCarbohydrateLispro,500 ÷ daily total500 ÷ 18 = 281 unit: 28 gcoverageaspartcarbohydrateratioOR
Regular
450 ÷ daily total
450/18 = 25
1 unit: 25 gcarbohydrateCorrectionLispro,1800 ÷ daily total1800 ÷ 18 = 1001 unit expectedfactoraspartto drop BG by100 mg/dLORRegular1500 ÷ daily total1500/18 = 831 unit expectedto drop BG by83 mg/dL
F. Additional Testing in New-Onset Diabetes
1. Diabetes autoantibodies1,2: Recommended for all children with suspected T2DM. No universal agreement regarding whether to test all patients.
a. Includes islet cell autoantibodies (ICAs) and antibodies to GAD (GAD65), insulin, and tyrosine phosphotases IA-2, IA-2ß, ZnT8.
b. Suggestive of T1DM if present, though about 5% of T1DM will not
have measurable ICAs, and some children with T2DM will have measureable ICAs.
2. Screening for autoimmune diseases in T1DM6:
a. Thyroid disease (present in 17% to 30% of patients with T1DM): Screen with TSH when clinically well and consider screening for thy- roid antibodies. If TSH normal, recheck every 1 to 2 years or sooner if symptoms develop.
b. Celiac disease (present in 1.6% to 16.4% of patients with T1DM): Screen with tissue transglutaminase (TTG) IgA antibody and total IgA. Repeat within 2 years of diabetes diagnosis and again after 5 years. Repeat more frequently if there are symptoms or a first degree relative with celiac disease.
G. Management of Diabetes6-8
1. Diabetes medications FDA-approved for children:
a. Insulin: See Tables 10.2 and 10.3 for calculations. Insulin doses are subsequently adjusted based on actual blood sugars.
b. Metformin: FDA-approved in children =10 years old, though
sometimes used off-label in younger children. Main side effects are




TYPES OF INSULIN PREPARATIONS AND SUGGESTED ACTION PROFILES FOR SUBCUTANEOUS ADMINISTRATION54
InsulinaOnsetPeakEffective DurationUltra rapid acting analog (faster aspart)5-10 min1-3 hr3-5 hrRapid acting (lispro, aspart, glulisine)10-20 min1-3 hr3-5 hrShort acting (regular)30-60 min2-4 hr5-8 hrIntermediate acting (NPH)2-4 hr4-12 hr12-24 hrLong actingGlargine2-4 hr8-12 hr22-24 hrDetemir1-2 hr4-7 hr20-24 hrDegludec30-90 minNo peak>42 hraAssuming 0.1-0.2 U/kg per injection. Onset and duration vary significantly by injection site.
NOTE: Be aware that there are stronger concentrations of various types of insulin available (e.g., U-500 regular insulin, which is 5 times more concentrated than U-100 regular insulin; U-300 insulin glargine). There are also pre-mixed combi- nations of rapid or short AND intermediate acting insulin (e.g., 70% NPH/30% regular [Humulin 70/30]).
NPH, Neutral protamine Hagedorn.
Modified from The American Diabetes Association. Practical Insulin: A Handbook for Prescribing Providers. 2nd ed. Alexandria, VA: American Diabetes Association; 2007.

gastrointestinal and are often transient. Extended release option available for patients with GI side effects.
2. T1DM management: The majority of children with T1DM should be treated with intensive insulin regimens, either via multiple daily injec- tions or continuous subcutaneous infusion.
3. T2DM management:
a. Lifestyle modification therapy (nutrition and physical activity) and metformin should be initiated at time of diagnosis.
b. Insulin therapy should be initiated if distinction between T1DM and T2DM is unclear, when HbA1c =8.5%, when random BG =250, or when patient with known T2DM is not meeting glycemic target with metformin and lifestyle modification alone. NOTE: If significant hyperglycemia (BG > 600) or ketosis is present, patient should be evaluated for DKA/HHS.
4. Goals of therapy: A1c <7.5% for T1DM and <7% for T2DM in patients on metformin alone (individualized to avoid excessive hypoglycemia).
5. Interdisciplinary care team should include mental health provider and medical nutrition therapy with initial education and annual update. Regularly assess for eating disorders, disease-related coping, depres- sion, and psychosocial stressors impacting diabetes management.
H. Diabetes-Related Devices9,10
1. Technology is rapidly changing, but general principles are described below.
2. Insulin pumps: Contain rapid acting insulin only and provide basal and bolus insulin. Doses can be programmed to vary throughout the day. Settings consist of:


a. Basal rate-continuous insulin infusion
b. Carbohydrate coverage-insulin to carbohydrate ratio
c. Hyperglycemia correction-based on correction factor and target blood glucose
NOTE: There is risk for DKA with interruptions in insulin delivery (e.g., pump malfunction) given lack of long-acting insulin.
3. Continuous glucose monitors (CGMs): Measure glucose concentration in interstitial fluid continuously and provide alerts for high and low glucose levels.
4. Sensor augmented insulin pump therapy: Integration of continuous glucose monitor and insulin pump to adjust insulin delivery based on blood glucose.
I. Monitoring6,8,9,11
1. Glycemic control:
a. Assessment of blood glucose using glucometer or CGM-multiple times daily (before meals/snacks, at bedtime, prior to exercise, with symptoms of hypoglycemia, after treating for hypoglycemia, before driving, etc.)
b. HbA1c every 3 months
2. Urine ketones should be checked with persistent hyperglycemia, any illness (regardless of blood glucose level), or with nausea/vomiting.
3. Associated conditions or complications: See Table 10.4.
J. Diabetic Emergencies12,13
1. Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
a. Definition: Hyperglycemia (or euglycemia in a patient with known diabetes), ketonemia, ketonuria, and metabolic acidosis (pH <7.30, bicarbonate <15 mEq/L)
b. BG reflects hydration status, pH reflects DKA severity
c. Symptoms: Nausea, emesis, abdominal pain, fruity breath, altered mental status, Kussmaul respirations
d. Precipitating factors: New-onset DM, known diabetes with missed insulin doses, insulin pump/infusion site malfunction, or physiologic stress due to acute illness
e. Management: See Fig. 10.1. Because the fluid and electrolyte requirements vary greatly from patient to patient, guidelines are only a starting point and therapy must be individualized based on
patient characteristics. NOTE: Initial insulin administration may cause transient worsening of the acidosis as potassium is driven into cells in exchange for hydrogen ions.
f. Cerebral edema: Most severe complication of DKA. Overly aggres- sive hydration and rapid correction of hyperglycemia may play
a role in its development. Risk factors include severe acidosis, evidence of renal insufficiency, young age and new onset, use of bicarbonate.




SCREENING FOR DIABETES-ASSOCIATED CONDITIONS AND COMPLICATIONS6,11
Type of Condition or Complication
Screening Test
FrequencyHypertensionBlood pressure measurementAt every visitHyperlipidemiaLipid profileAt diagnosis, then yearly if T2DM orT1DM and overweight; every 5 years if low-density lipoprotein [LDL]
<100 mg/dL
RetinopathyDilated eye examinationT1DM: yearly after 3-5 years of diabetes, provided = age 10;
T2DM: at diagnosis, yearlyDiabetic nephropathyRandom spot urine microalbumin-to-creatinine
ratioT1DM: yearly after 5 years of diabetes, provided = age 10;
T2DM: at diagnosis, yearlyNeuropathyFoot examT1DM: yearly after 5 years of diabetes, provided = age 10;
T2DM: at diagnosis, yearlyNonalcoholic steato-
hepatitis (NASH)ALT, ASTT2DM: at diagnosis, yearlyObstructive sleep
apnea (OSA)Review of symptomsT2DM: at every visitPolycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)Menstrual history ± lab evaluationT2DM: at every visit10ALT, Alanine amino transferase; AST, aspartate amino transferase; T1DM, type 1 diabetes mellitus; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus.

g. Once DKA is resolved, transition to subcutaneous (SQ) insulin. See Tables 10.2 and 10.3 for calculations or resume home insulin doses.
2. Hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state (HHS)
a. Definition: Extreme hyperglycemia (BG >600 mg/dL) and hyperos- molarity (>320 mOsm/kg), without significant ketosis or acidosis.
b. Characteristics of HHS: Gradually increasing polyuria and polydipsia leading to profound dehydration, altered consciousness.
c. Management:
(1) Fluids: Fluids alone will decrease BG due to dilution, promotion of glucosuria, and increased glucose uptake with improved cir- culation. Fluid replacement should be more rapid than in DKA with goal of gradual decline in serum sodium (about 0.5 mEq/ dL/h) and osmolality. Bolus =20 cc/kg 0.9% saline and repeat until perfusion improved. Then start maintenance fluids plus deficit replacement over 24 to 48 hours using 0.45% to 0.75% saline (if perfusion inadequate, consider isotonic fluids). Urine output should also be replaced.
(2) Insulin therapy: Start insulin (0.025 to 0.05 unit/kg/h) when BG no longer declining at least 50 mg/dL/h with fluids alone. Titrate insulin to decrease BG by 75 to 100 mg/dL/h.



Labs within 1st hour
CMP, VBG, CBC
Urinalysis, glucose






Labs
• Glucose q1hr
• VBG, BMP,
phosphate q2hr
• Urine ketones with each void
• HbA1c, serum
osmolarity once
• Potassium q1hr until K <5.5





DKA present if: (1) Glucose >200mg/dL [or known history of diabetes], (2) pH <7.3 or bicarb <15mmol/L, and (3) ketonuria



Hydration fluids
Total IVF = maintenance rate + fluid deficit divided over 48hrs.
Typically 1.5x maintenance.
Order 2 separate solutions and determine ratio based on BG:
(1) NS + 20 mEq/L K Acetate + 20 mEq/L K Phos
(2) D10 0.45%NS + 20 mEq/L K Acetate + 20 mEq/L K Phos (start once glucose <300)
  Hold all potassium in fluids until patient voids and K<5.5. If K<3 increase to 30 mEq/L K Acetate + 30 mEq/L K Phos in each fluid.a


Initial fluid resuscitation 10-20 mL/kg NS IV over 1 hour (may repeat as needed for cardiovascular shock)





Continuous insulin infusion
Regular insulin 0.1 unit/kg/hr
If <2 yrs consider 0.05 unit/kg/hr


Basal/long-acting insulin
 Can be safely administered while on insulin infusion. Should be given within 24hr prior to discontinuation of infusion per home dosing scheduling.


BG blood glucose, SC subcutaneous
Note: This algorithm may need to be individualized depending on patient presentation.
a) Patients with DKA are total body K depleted and are at risk for severe hypokalemia during DKA therapy. However serum K levels may be normal or elevated as a result of the shift of K to the extracellular compartment in the setting of acidosis.
b) Appropriate to transition to SC insulin once pH >7.3, normal anion gap, normal physical exam, and patient ready to eat.

 FIGURE 10.1 


Transition to SC insulinb
(1) Administer rapid-acting insulin with meal to account for pre-meal BG and carbohydrates consumed.
(2) Stop insulin infusion and dextrose-containing fluids 30 minutes after rapid-acting insulin administered.

Management of Diabetic Ketoacidosis. (Modified from Cooke DW, Plotnick L. Management of diabetic ketoacidosis in children and adolescents. Pediatr Rev. 2008;29:431-436.)



AGE-BASED NORMAL VALUES FOR ROUTINE THYROID FUNCTION TESTS
Test	Age	Normal Range

TSH (mIU/L)	Birth-6 days
1 week-3 months
3 months-12 months
1-5 years
6-10 years
>10 years
Free T4 (ng/dL)	Birth-3 days 4-30 days
31 days-12 months
13 months-5 years
6-10 years
11-19 years
>19 years

Total T4 (mCg/dL)
< 1 months
1-23 months
2-12 years
13-20 years
>20 years
T4, Thyroxine; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.

0.70-15.2
0.72-11.0
0.73-8.35
0.70-5.97
0.60-4.84
0.45-4.50
0.66-2.71
0.83-3.09
0.48-2.34
0.85-1.75
0.90-1.67
0.93-1.60
0.82-1.77
Male 4.5-17.2
5.9-13.9
5.7-11.6
5.1-10.3
4.9-10.5















Female 4.5-17.2
5.9-13.9
5.7-11.6
5.3-11.7
5.1-11.9

NOTE: If age-specific reference ranges are provided by the laboratory that is running the assay, please refer to those ranges.
TSH and Free T4 reference ranges from Labcorp; Total T4 reference range from Quest Diagnostics.

(3) Electrolytes: Potassium, phosphate, and magnesium deficits greater than in DKA; monitor every 2 to 4 hours. Start potassium replacement with 40 mEq/L once K <5 mEq/L.

A. Thyroid Tests15,17,18
1. Normal thyroid function values: See reference values for age (Table 10.5). Preterm infants have different ranges (Table 10.6).
2. Interpretation of abnormal thyroid function values: See Table 10.7.
3. Imaging studies:
a. Thyroid ultrasound: Most useful in assessing thyroid nodules for features suspicious for malignancy.
b. Thyroid uptake scan: Measures uptake of Technetium (99mTc) pertechnetate or radioactive iodine by metabolically active thyroid tissue, helping to identify etiology of hyperthyroidism.
B. Hypothyroidism
1. Types of hypothyroidism: Can be either congenital or acquired and either primary or central. See Table 10.8 for details on identification and management.



MEAN TSH AND T4 OF PRETERM AND TERM INFANTS 0-28 DAYS18
Age ± SDCord (Day 0)Day 7Day 14Day 28T4 (mCg/DL)23-27a5.44 ± 2.024.04 ± 1.794.74 ± 2.566.14 ± 2.3328-306.29 ± 2.026.29 ± 2.106.60 ± 2.257.46 ± 2.3331-347.61 ± 2.259.40 ± 3.429.09 ± 3.578.94 ± 2.95>379.17 ± 1.9412.67 ± 2.8710.72 ± 1.409.71 ± 2.18FT4 (NG/DL)23-271.28 ± 0.411.47 ± 0.561.45 ± 0.511.50 ± 0.4328-301.45 ± 0.431.82 ± 0.661.65 ± 0.441.71 ± 0.4331-341.49 ± 0.332.14 ± 0.571.96 ± 0.431.88 ± 0.46>371.41 ± 0.392.70 ± 0.572.03 ± 0.281.65 ± 0.34TSH (MIU/L)23-276.80 ± 2.903.50 ± 2.603.90 ± 2.703.80 ± 4.7028-307.00 ± 3.703.60 ± 2.504.90 ± 11.23.60 ± 2.5031-347.90 ± 5.203.60 ± 4.803.80 ± 9.303.50 ± 3.40>376.70 ± 4.802.60 ± 1.802.50 ± 2.001.80 ± 0.90aWeeks gestational age
FT4, Free thyroxine; T4, thyroxine; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
Data modified from Williams FL, Simpson J, Delahunty C, et al. Collaboration from The Scottish Preterm Thyroid Group: Developmental trends in cord and postpartum serum thyroid hormones in preterm infants. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004;89:5314-5320.



THYROID FUNCTION TESTS: INTERPRETATION
DisorderTSHT4Free T4Primary hyperthyroidismLHHigh N to HPrimary hypothyroidismHLLHypothalamic/pituitary hypothyroidismL, N, HaLLTBG deficiencyNLNEuthyroid sick syndromeL, N, HaLL to low NTSH adenoma or pituitary resistanceN to HHHSubclinical hypothyroidismbHNNaCan be normal, low, or slightly high.
bTreatment may not be necessary.
H, High; L, low; N, normal; T4, thyroxine; TBG, thyroxine-binding globulin; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.


2. Subclinical hypothyroidism and obesity19: Moderate elevations in thyroid- stimulating hormone (TSH [4 to 10 mIU/L]), with normal or slightly elevated triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) are seen in 10% to 23% of obese children. There does not appear to be a benefit to treating these individuals. Values tend to normalize with weight loss. Could consider testing for thyroid antibodies to further clarify whether there is true thyroid dysfunction.

TABLE 10.8HYPOTHYROIDISM55,56Clinical SymptomsOnsetEtiologyManagementFollow-upPRIMARY/CONGENITALLarge fontanelles, lethargy, con-Symptoms usually develop byPrimary: Defect of fetal thyroidReplacement with L-thyroxineMonitor T4 and TSH 1-2 weeksstipation, hoarse cry, hypotonia,2 weeks; almost always bydevelopment most common.once newborn screen isafter initiation and then everyhypothermia, jaundice. Most6 weeks.Other causes include TSHpositive, pending results of2 weeks until TSH normalizes.often picked up on newbornSome infants may be relativelyreceptor mutation or thyroidconfirmatory testing.a Goal T4Once levels are adequate fol-screen.asymptomatic if not causeddyshormonogenesis.in upper half of normal range.low per schedule listed below.by absence of thyroid gland.ORIn primary hypothyroidism,Treated patients are still at riskCentral: Deficiency of TSH orTSH should be kept in normalfor developmental delay.thyrotropin-releasing hormonerange for age.(TRH).ACQUIREDGrowth deceleration, coarse brittleCan occur as early as 2 yearsPrimary: Can be caused byReplacement with l-thyroxine.aFollow every 1-3 months duringhair, dry skin, delayed tooth eruption, cold intolerance.old.Hashimoto thyroiditis (diagnosis supported by + antithyroglobu-Targets for TSH and T4 same as for congenital hypothyroid-the first 12 months, every 2-4 months until 3 years, andlin or antimicrosomal antibod-ism above.then every 3-12 months untilies), head/neck radiation.growth complete. Follow 4-6ORweeks after any dose change.Central: Caused by pituitary/hypothalamic insults including brain tumor.

aBecause of the risk of inducing adrenal crisis if adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) deficiency is present, the treatment of central hypothyroidism should not be started until normal ACTH/cortisol function is documented.
NOTE: Thyroid hormone levels in premature infants are lower than those seen in full-term infants. Furthermore, the TSH surge seen at approximately 24 hours of age in full-term babies does not appear in preterm infants. In this population, lower levels are associated with increased illness; however, the effect of replacement therapy remains controversial.
l-thyroxine, Levothyroxine; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.


TABLE 10.9HYPERTHYROIDISMDistinguishing Imaging/LabPresentationFindingsManagementGRAVES DISEASETypical symptoms of hyper-TSH is often undetectable. ?First-line treatment in children isthyroidism plus diffuse99mTc-pertechnate uptake.methimazole. Radioactive iodinegoiter, eye symptoms,Positive TSI.(131I) or surgical thyroidectomylocalized dermopathy, andare options for initial treatmentlymphoid hyperplasiaor refractory cases. Followsymptoms, T4, and TSH levels.HASHIMOTO THYROIDITIS± Initial hyperthyroidism,Often low but detectableHyperthyroid phase is usu-followed by eventualTSH and less significantally self-limited; patientthyroid burnout andincrease in T4. ? 99mTc-may eventually needhypothyroidism.pertechnate uptake.thyroid replacement therapy.Significant elevationPropranolol if symptomaticof thyroglobulin and/orduring hyperthyroid phase.microsomal antibody.99mTc, Technetium; T4, thyroxine; TSH, thyroid stimulating hormone; TSI, thyroid stimulating immunoglobulin.




3. Newborn screening for hypothyroidism16,20: Mandated in all 50 states. Measures a combination of TSH and T4, based on the particular state's algorithm; 1:25 abnormal tests are confirmed. Congenital hypothyroid- ism has prevalence of 1:3000 to 1:4000 U.S. infants. If abnormal results are found, clinicians should follow recommendations of the American College of Medical Genetics ACT Sheets and Algorithm for confirmation testing.
C. Hyperthyroidism
1. General features:
a. Epidemiology: Prevalence increases with age, rare before adoles- cence; female-to-male predominance.
b. Etiology: Most common cause is Graves disease, followed by sub- acute thyroiditis. Less common causes are Hashitoxicosis, autono- mously functioning thyroid nodule, factitious hyperthyroidism (intake of exogenous hormone), TSH-secreting pituitary tumor (rare), and pituitary resistance to thyroid hormone. See Table 10.9 for compari- son of Graves and Hashimoto disease.
c. Laboratory findings: See Table 10.7. Further tests include TSH receptor-stimulating antibody, thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI), antithyroglobulin and antimicrosomal (thyroid peroxidase) antibodies.

2. Thyroid storm21:
a. Presentation: Acute onset of hyperthermia, tachycardia, and restless- ness. May progress to delirium, coma, and death.
b. Treatment: Admission to ICU. Emergent pediatric endocrinology consultation recommended. Therapy aimed at relieving symptoms (propranolol) and reducing peripheral conversion of T4 to T3 (hydro- cortisone), thyroid hormone production (antithyroid drugs), release of hormone from thyroid gland (potassium iodide), and reabsorption from enterohepatic circulation (cholestyramine).
3. Neonatal thyrotoxicosis:
a. Presentation: Microcephaly, frontal bossing, intrauterine growth restric- tion (IUGR), tachycardia, systolic hypertension leading to widened pulse pressure, irritability, failure to thrive, exophthalmos, goiter, flushing, vomiting, diarrhea, jaundice, thrombocytopenia, and cardiac failure or arrhythmias. Onset from immediately after birth to weeks.
b. Etiology: Occurs exclusively in infants born to mothers with Graves disease. Caused by transplacental passage of maternal TSI. Occasionally, mothers are unaware they have Graves. Even if a mother has received definitive treatment (thyroidectomy or radiation therapy), passage of TSI remains possible.
c. Treatment and monitoring: Propranolol for symptom control. Methimazole to lower thyroxine levels. Digoxin may be indicated for heart failure. Disease usually resolves by 6 months of age.

 III. PARATHYROID GLAND AND VITAMIN D22-24	
A. Parathyroid Hormone Function
1. Increases serum calcium by increasing bone resorption
2. Increases calcium and magnesium reuptake and phosphorus excretion in the kidney
3. Increases 25-hydroxy vitamin D conversion to 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D, in order to increase calcium absorption in the intestine
B. Distinguishing Between Abnormalities Related to Parathyroid Hormone and Vitamin D
See Table 10.10.
C. Vitamin D Supplementation
Please see Chapter 21 for additional information.

 IV. ADRENAL GLAND25-29	
A. Adrenal Insufficiency
1. Causes of adrenal insufficiency:
a. Impaired steroidogenesis, as in congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
b. Adrenal destruction or dysfunction as in primary adrenal insuf- ficiency (AI) (Addison disease), autoimmune polyendocrine syn- drome, or adrenoleukodystrophy.







DISTINGUISHING BETWEEN DISORDERS OF PARATHYROID GLANDS AND VITAMIN D REGULATION

Hypoparathyroidism	Hyperparathyroidism


PTH Resistance/
Pseudo-Hypoparathyroidism	Vitamin D Deficiency

PTH? or inappropriately normal in the setting of hypocalcemia??-/?1,25-D???-25-OHD--/?-?Calcium???-/?Phosphorus???-/?Alkaline Phosphate-/?-/???Common CausesDiGeorge, autoimmune (APS), iatrogenicPrimary: Adenoma, hyperplasia Secondary: Renal failure, ricketsGenetic mutationsNutritional deficiencyFirst line RxCalcium, calcitriolHydration with normal saline,CalcitriolVitamin D +/- calciumsurgical resection
1,25-D, 1,25 dihydroxy vitamin D; 25-OHD, 25-hydroxy vitamin D; APS, autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome; MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia; PTH, parathyroid hormone; Rx, treatment.




17-HYDROXYPROGESTERONE, SERUM
AgeBaseline (ng/dL)Premature (31-35 weeks)=360Term infants (3 days)=4201-12 months11-1701-4 years4-1155-9 years=9010-13 years=16914-17 years16-283Males, Tanner II-III12-130Females, Tanner II-III18-220Males, Tanner IV-V51-190Females, Tanner IV-V36-200Male (18-30 years)32-307Adult femaleFollicular phase=185Midcycle phase=225Luteal phase=285Reference ranges from Quest Diagnostics LC/MS assay (liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectroscopy).
For preterm infants or infants born small for gestational age, see Olgemöller B, Roscher AA, Liebl B, et al. Screening for congenital adrenal hyperplasia: adjustment of 17-hydroxyprogesterone cut-off values to both age and birth weight markedly improves the predictive value. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003;88:5790-5794.


c. Secondary AI caused by impaired circulating adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) due to hypothalamic or pituitary pathology.
d. Acquired insufficiency secondary to long-term corticosteroid use leading to HPA suppression. NOTE: This is the most common cause seen in clinical practice and may also occur in setting of chronic high-dose inhaled corticosteroids.
2. Laboratory findings in adrenal insufficiency:
a. In primary AI, there is deficient mineralocorticoid and glucocorti- coid production. In central AI, there is only deficient glucocorticoid production, and mineralocorticoid production is normal.
b. Primary AI: Elevated ACTH, elevated plasma renin activity, low corti- sol, low aldosterone, hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia.
c. Central AI: Normal/low ACTH, normal plasma renin activity (no impairment of mineralocorticoid function), low cortisol, normal aldosterone, hyponatremia, hypoglycemia.
d. In infants with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH),
17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP) is increased (see Table 10.11 for normal values by age).
3. Diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency:
a. Initial screening with AM cortisol level, which may be drawn con- comitantly with an ACTH level.
b. See Table 10.12 for interpretation of AM cortisol results.




CORTISOL, 8 am
Interpretation	Cortisol (mCg/dL)

Indeterminate	5-14 mCg/dL



c. Plasma ACTH elevation >100 pg/mL with concomitant hypocorti- solemia <10 ug/dL is consistent with glucocorticoid deficiency due to primary AI.
d. Standard dose ACTH stimulation test is used to confirm diagnosis.
4. ACTH stimulation test:
a. In brief, with ACTH deficiency or prolonged adrenal suppression, there is an inadequate rise in cortisol after a single ACTH dose.
b. See Box 10.1 for interpretation of ACTH stimulation test.
5. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH):
a. See Fig. 10.2.
b. Group of autosomal recessive disorders characterized by a defect in one of the enzymes required in the synthesis of adrenal hormones.
c. The enzymatic defect results in impaired synthesis of adrenal steroids beyond the enzymatic block and overproduction of the precursors before the block.
d. 21-hydroxylase deficiency accounts for 90% of cases.
e. Most common cause of ambiguous genitalia in females.



 FIGURE 10.2 
Biosynthetic Pathway for Steroid Hormones.

6. Diagnosis of CAH on newborn screen:
a. The test measures 17-OHP and is 2% specific, resulting in a 98% false-positive rate due to artificial elevations from prematurity, sick- ness, stress.27
b. If 17-OHP is 40 to 100 ng/mL, repeat test.
c. If 17-OHP is higher than 100 ng/mL, obtain electrolytes and serum 17-OHP. If evidence of hyperkalemia or hyponatremia, initiate treat- ment with hydrocortisone.
d. In complete enzyme deficiency, adrenal crisis in untreated patients occurs at 1 to 2 weeks of age due to salt wasting.
7. Diagnosis of CAH outside of newborn period:
a. Suspect partial enzyme deficiency if evidence of androgen excess (premature adrenarche, hirsutism, irregular menses, acne, advanced bone age).
b. Morning 17-OHP levels may be elevated.
c. Diagnosis may require an ACTH stimulation test. A significant rise in the 17-OHP level 60 minutes after ACTH injection is diagnostic. Cortisol response may be decreased.
8. Addison disease30:
a. Primary AI due to autoimmune destruction of the adrenal glands.
b. In children, it may be part of autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1), which also includes hypoparathyroidism and chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis.
c. Individuals with autoimmune Addison disease should also be screened for other endocrinopathies (T1DM, celiac disease, hypo- thyroidism, hypoparathyroidism).


TABLE 10.13POTENCY OF VARIOUS THERAPEUTIC STEROIDSC
Glucocorticoid Effecta (in mgMineralocorticoid Effectb (in mg of Cortisol per mg ofSteroid	of Cortisol per mg of Steroid)Steroid)Cortisol (hydrocortisone)	11Cortisone acetate (oral)	0.80.8Cortisone acetate	0.80.8(intramuscular)Prednisone	40.25Prednisolone	40.25Methylprednisolone	50.4ß-Methasone	250Triamcinolone	50Dexamethasone	3009a-Fluorocortisone	15200(fludrocortisone)Deoxycorticosterone acetate	020Aldosterone	0.3200-1,000aTo determine cortisol equivalent of a given steroid dose, multiply dose of steroid by corresponding number in column for glucocorticoid or mineralocorticoid effect. To determine dose of a given steroid based on desired cortisol dose, divide desired hydrocortisone dose by corresponding number in the column.
bTotal physiologic replacement for salt retention is usually 0.1 mg fludrocortisone, regardless of patient size.
cSet relative to potency of cortisol.
Modified from Sperling MA. Pediatric Endocrinology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2008:476.


MAINTENANCE DOSING STEROIDS
Adrenal Hormone	Dose

Mineralocorticoid dosinga	1.  PO fludrocortisone acetate 0.1 mg/m2/day
OR
2. If unable to take PO: IV hydrocortisone 50 mg/m2/dayb PLUS
3. Infants require an additional 1-2 g (17-34 mEq) of sodium supplementation daily

aRequired in salt losing forms of adrenal insufficiency.
bSynthetic steroids (e.g., prednisone, dexamethasone) do not have sufficient mineralocorticoid effect.


9. Treatment of adrenal insufficiency:
a. See Table 10.13 for relative steroid potencies.
b. See Table 10.14 for maintenance glucocorticoid and mineralocorti- coid dosing.
c. Typically, lower doses are required for central AI, intermediate doses for primary AI, and higher doses for CAH.




STRESS DOSING STEROIDS


Moderate Stress (minor illness,
fever)
1. 
PO hydrocortisone 30-50 mg/m2/day ÷ TID
OR
2. PO prednisone 6-10 mg/m2/day ÷ BID




10. Stress dosing of steroids:
a. Hydrocortisone and cortisone are the only glucocorticoids that provide the necessary mineralocorticoid effects; prednisone and dexamethasone do not.
b. See Table 10.15 for calculation of moderate and major stress dose steroid calculations.
c. See Box 10.2 for rapid approximation of steroid dosing in the set- ting of acute adrenal crisis.
11. Indications for stress dosing of steroids:
a. "Stress" is defined as systemic infection, febrile illness, diarrheal illness, trauma/fracture, burns, or surgery.
b. Stress glucocorticoids should be given to patients:
(1) With known primary or secondary AI
(2) Following discontinuation of exogenous steroid (given for greater than 2 weeks at doses greater than physiologic replacement) until there is recovery of endogenous cortisol production (con- sider the need for 8am cortisol or ACTH stimulation test)
c. Consider for hypotension refractory to fluid resuscitation in patients with suspicion for AI (even if not clinically diagnosed).
B. Adrenal Cortex Hormone Excess29
1. Causes:
a. Hypercortisolism (Cushing syndrome):
2. Exogenous steroid use
3. Excess cortisol secretion from the adrenals
4. Excess ACTH production from ectopic ACTH producing tumor
5. Excess ACTH production from a pituitary tumor (known as Cushing disease)


b. Hyperaldosteronism:
2. Benign tumor of adrenal cortex (Conn syndrome)
3. Overproduction by both adrenal glands (idiopathic hyperaldosteronism)
4. Rarely glucocorticoid remediable aldosteronism
5. Less common in children than hypercortisolism
6. Lab findings include hypokalemia and hypernatremia
2. Diagnosis of Cushing Syndrome31:
a. Step 1: Demonstrate hypercortisolism with two separate measure- ments. Multiple screening tests are available; specificity increases when they are used in combination:
2. 24-hour urine cortisol (>90 µg/24 hour consistent with
hypercortisolism).
3. Midnight salivary cortisol level (>0.13 mCg/dL consistent with hypercortisolism).
4. Overnight low dose dexamethasone suppression test: Give 1 mg dexamethasone at 11pm followed by an 8am serum cortisol the next morning (normal suppression <1.8 mCg/dL).
b. Step 2: Determine etiology of hypercortisolism (ACTH-dependent vs. independent)
2. Obtain plasma ACTH between 11pm-1am: >23 pg/mL in a patient with hypercortisolism (as diagnosed above) indicates ACTH dependency (Cushing Disease vs. ectopic tumor).
3. If cause is Cushing disease (ACTH-dependent), ACTH level will be >100x elevated.
4. In ACTH-independent Cushing syndrome, level will be <5 pg/mL.
C. Adrenal Medulla Hormone Excess: Pheochromocytoma32-34
1. Clinical findings:
a. Extreme, sustained elevations in blood pressure (accounts for <1% of pediatric hypertension).
b. Associated with syndromes: multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) IIa and IIb, von Hippel-Lindau, neurofibromatosis (NF) 1, familial paraganglioma syndrome.
2. Diagnosis:
a. Urine metanephrines (see Table EC 10.A for age-specific normal values).
b. Plasma metanephrines (see Table EC 10.B for age-specific normal values).
 V. DISORDERS OF SO DIUM AND WATER REGULATION35	
A. Distinguishing Between Disorders of Sodium and Water Regulation: See Table 10.16
B. Correction of Hypo- and Hypernatremia: See Chapter 11.
C. Conducting a Water Deprivation Test
1. Begin test after a 24-hour period of adequate hydration and stable weight.



CATECHOLAMINES,a URINE
Compound3-8 Years9-12 Years13-17 YearsAdultsDopamine (mCg/24 hr)80-37851-47451-64552-480Epinephrine
(mCg/24 hr)1-7=8=112-14Norepinephrine
(mCg/24 hr)5-415-5012-8815-100Homovanillic acid
(mg/24 hr)0.5-6.71.1-6.81.4-7.21.6-7.5Vanillylmandelic
acid (g/24 hr)=2.3=3.4=3.9=6.03 months-45-9 years10-13 years14-17 years18-29yearsyearsMetanephrines	25-117
(mCg/24 hr)11-13951-27540-18925-222Normetanephrines	54-24931-39867-50369-53140-412(mCg/24 hr)
aCatecholamines are elevated in a variety of tumors, including neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroma, ganglioblastoma, and pheochromocytoma.
Data from JHH laboratories.


TABLE EC 10.BCATECHOLAMINES, PLASMASupine (pg/mL)Sitting (pg/mL)EPINEPHRINE3-15 years=464Not determinedAdult=50=95NOREPINEPHRINE3-15 years=1251Not determinedAdult112-658217-1109DOPAMINE3-15 years=60Not determinedAdult=30=30Data from Blondell R, Foster MB, Dave KC. Disorders of puberty. Am Family Phys. 1999;60:209-218; and JHH Laboratories.

Chapter 10 Endocrinology	247


DIFFERENTIATING BETWEEN DISORDERS OF SODIUM AND WATER REGULATION
Cerebral SaltSIADHWastingDISerum Na+<135 mEq/L<135 mEq/L>145 mEq/LaSerum Osm<280 mOsm/kg<280 mOsm/kg>300 mOsm/kgaUrine Na+>40 mEq/L>40 mEq/L< 40 mEq/LbUrine Osm>100 mOsm/kg (inappropriately
concentrated)>100 mOsm/kg (inappropriately
concentrated)<300 mOsm/kg (inap- propriately dilute)Volume StatusEuvolemiaHypovolemiaHypovolemiaUrine OutputDecreasedIncreasedIncreasedOther lab	High vasopressin	Low vasopressin	1. Central: low vaso- findings				pressin (<0.5 pg/mL)
2. Nephrogenic: high
vasopressin
Causes	Nausea, CNS and pulmonary pathol- ogy, surgery, certain medications

CNS disorders, hypersecretion of atrial natriuretic peptide
1. 
Central:?ADH secre- tion from posterior
pituitary
2. Nephrogenic: ADH resistance at the nephron collecting duct







aNormal serum sodium and osmolality can be seen in compensated diabetes insipidus, and water deprivation test should be performed if clinical suspicion is high.
bUrine sodium generally low in diabetes insipidus, however this depends on solute intake.
ADH, Antidiuretic hormone; CNS, central nervous system; DI, diabetes insipidus; Na+, sodium; Osm, osmolarity; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion; IV, intravenous.

2. Obtain a baseline weight after bladder emptying, as well as baseline urine and blood osmolality and electrolytes.
3. Restrict fluids (max 7 hours, 4 hours for infants).
4. Measure body weight and urine-specific gravity and volume hourly.
5. If urine specific gravity ?1.014, or weight loss approaching 5%, termi- nate test and obtain urine and blood for osmolality and electrolytes.
D. Interpretation of Water Deprivation Test Results: See Table 10.17
E. Differentiating Between Central Versus Nephrogenic Causes of Diabetes Insipidus
1. Administer vasopressin subcutaneously at end of water deprivation test. Assess urine output, urine specific gravity, and water intake.
2. See Table 10.18 for interpretation of vasopressin test.

248	Part II  Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information


RESULTS OF WATER DEPRIVATION TEST IN NORMAL VERSUS CENTRAL/NEPHROGENIC DIABETES INSIPIDUS
Normal
(Psychogenic Polydipsia)
Central/Nephrogenic DIUrine volumeDecreasedNo changeWeight lossNo change=5%Urine osmolality (mOsm/L)500-1400 (>1000 generally
excludes diagnosis of DI)<150Plasma osmolality (mOsm/L)288-291>290Urine specific gravity=1.010<1.005Urine: plasma osmolality ratio>2<2DI, Diabetes insipidus.



RESULTS OF VASOPRESSIN ADMINISTRATION IN EVALUATION OF DIABETES INSIPIDUS
Psychogenic PolydipsiaCentralaNephrogenicUrine volume??No changeUrine specific gravity=1.010=1.010No changeOral fluid intakeNo change?No changeaIn central diabetes insipidus, urine osmolality increases by 200% or more in response to vasopressin administration.


ESTIMATED GROWTH VELOCITY IN CHILDREN BASED ON AGE

Age	Growth
1 year old to 4 years old	10 cm/year

8 years old to 12 years old	5 cm/yeara

aRates may be considerably higher at later end of this age range when individuals have entered their pubertal growth spurt.


A. Assessing Height
1. Mid-parental height and target height range:
a. Mid-parental height for boys: (Paternal height + maternal height + 5 in or 13 cm)/2
b. Mid-parental height for girls: (Paternal height + maternal height - 5 in or 13 cm)/2
c. Target height range: Mid-parental height ± 2 SD (1 SD = 2 in or 5 cm)
2. Determining average growth velocity: See Table 10.19.
3. See Figs. EC 10.A and EC 10.B for normal growth velocity curves for American females and males, respectively.






Centiles for girls	97maturing at	90average time	75502510397 and 3 centilesat peak heightvelocity for:Early (+2SD) maturersLate (-2SD) maturers

907532510

 FIGURE EC 10.A 
Height Velocity by Age for American Girls. (From Kelly A, Winer KK, Kalkwarf H, et al. Age-based references ranges for annual height velocity in US children. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99:2104.)






Centiles for boys	97
maturing at	90
average time	75
50
25
10
3
97 and 3 centiles at peak height velocity for:
Early (+2SD) maturers Late (-2SD) maturers97
90310 2575
50

 FIGURE EC 10.B 
Height Velocity by Age for American Boys. (From Kelly A, Winer KK, Kalkwarf H, et al. Age-based references ranges for annual height velocity in US children. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99:2104.)





248.e2




PATHOLOGIC VERSUS NONPATHOLGIC CAUSES OF SHORT STATURE

Familial Short StatureConstitutional Growth DelayPathologic Causes (endocrine, genetic, etc.)Growth velocityNormalNormalDecreasedOnset of pubertyNormalDelayedDepends on causeFamily historyShort statureDelayed puberty+/-Bone ageNormalDelayedUsually delayed (maybe normal in genetic causes)


B. Short Stature
1. Definition:
a. Short stature is height <2 SD below mean or <3rd percentile for age and sex.
b. Growth failure is defined as height <2 SD below mid-parental height or height velocity <10th percentile for age resulting in a downward trend crossing height percentiles.
c. Majority of children with short stature are healthy; true growth failure is typically pathologic and requires evaluation.
2. Determining etiology:
a. See Table 10.20 for approach to differentiating between pathologic and non-pathologic causes of short stature.
b. Bone age is determined by radiographs of left wrist and hand.
c. See Fig. 10.3 for initial work up.
d. A more extensive work-up can be guided by history and physical exam and could include:
(1) TTG and IgA (celiac disease)
(2) CBC with differential (anemia, malignancy, inflammation)
(3) CRP/ESR (inflammation, infection)
(4) CMP (renal/liver disorders, malnutrition, calcium disorders)
(5) TSH, free T4 (hypothyroidism)
(6) Karyotype or targeted gene testing (Turner syndrome, SHOX mutation)
(7) IGF1, IGFBP-3 [proxy measurements for growth hormone (GH)]; IGFBP-3 has a higher specificity in children <10); see Table 10.21 and Table EC 10.C for normal values of IGF-1 and IGFBP-3, respectively
3. Indications for growth hormone use38:
The FDA has approved growth hormone for:
a. Growth hormone deficiency
b. Children born small-for-gestational-age (SGA) who between 2 and 4 years of age have shown inadequate catch-up growth or evidence of normal growth velocity with height < 2.5 SD below mean





Yes

Yes	No

Yes	No




 FIGURE 10.3 
Differential Diagnosis of Short Stature.




INSULIN-LIKE GROWTH FACTOR 1a
Age (Years)Male (ng/mL)Females (ng/mL)<1=142=1851-1.9=134=1752-2.9=135=1783-3.930-15538-2144-4.928-18134-2385-5.931-21437-2726-6.938-25345-3167-7.948-29858-3678-8.962-34776-4249-9.980-39899-48310-10.9100-449125-54111-11.9123-497152-59312-12.9146-541178-63613-13.9168-576200-66414-14.9187-599214-67315-15.9201-609218-65916-16.9209-602208-61917-17.9207-576185-551aA clearly normal IGF-1 level argues against growth hormone (GH) deficiency, except in young children in whom there is considerable overlap between normal levels and those with GH deficiency.
Reference ranges from Quest Diagnostics LC/MS (liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry) assay.



c. Chronic kidney disease
d. Turner syndrome, Noonan syndrome, Prader-Willi syndrome
e. Short stature homeobox containing gene (SHOX) deficiency
f. Children with idiopathic short stature (height <2.25 SD below mean and unlikely to attain normal adult height)

A. Puberty
1. For normal pubertal stages, please see Chapter 5.
2. For definitions of precocious and delayed puberty, see Table 10.22.
B. Lab Evaluation
1. LH, FSH, estradiol, and testosterone (free and total), see Tables 10.23-10.27 for normal values. NOTE: Early in puberty, LH production peaks overnight and is lower during the day, so consider obtaining levels in the early morning.
2. GnRH stimulation test46:
a. Purpose: To evaluate for biochemical evidence of puberty when LH, FSH, and sex hormone testing is inconclusive.
b. Method: Give GnRH analog (Leuprolide) SQ, and measure LH and FSH levels at 0 and 60 minutes.



INSULIN-LIKE GROWTH FACTOR-BINDING PROTEIN (IGF-BP3)a
Agemg/LTanner StageFemale (mg/L)Male (mg/L)0-7 days=0.7Tanner I1.2-6.41.4-5.28-15 days0.5-1.4Tanner II2.8-6.92.3-6.316 days-1 years0.7-3.6Tanner III3.9-9.43.2-8.92 years0.8-3.9Tanner IV3.3-8.13.7-8.73 years0.9-4.3Tanner V2.7-9.12.6-8.64 years1.0-4.75 years1.1-5.26 years1.3-5.67 years1.4-6.18 years1.6-6.59 years1.8-7.110 years2.1-7.711 years2.4-8.412 years2.7-8.913 years3.1-9.514 years3.3-10.015 years3.5-10.016 years3.4-9.517 years3.2-8.718 years3.1-7.919 years2.9-7.3Adults continue to varyby age
aLevels below the 5th percentile suggest growth hormone deficiency. This test may have greater discrimination than the IGF-1 test in younger patients.
Data from Quest Diagnostics immunochemiluminometric assay (ICMA).




DEFINITIONS OF PRECOCIOUS AND DELAYED SEXUAL MATURATION
Females	Males


Delayed	No thelarche by 13 years or >5 years between thelarche and menarche.
Primary amenorrhea: no menarche by age 16 years in the presence of secondary sexual character- istics, or no menarche and no secondary sexual characteristics by age 14 years.

No testicular enlargement by 14 years.





LUTEINIZING HORMONE
AgeMales (mIU/mL)Females (mIU/mL)0-2 yearsNot establishedNot established3-7 years=0.26=0.268-9 years=0.46=0.6910-11 years=3.13=4.3812-14 years0.23-4.410.04-10.8015-17 years0.29-4.770.97-14.70Tanner StagesMales (mIU/mL)Females (mIU/mL)I=0.52=0.15II=1.76=2.91III=4.06=7.01IV-V0.06-4.770.10-14.70Data from Quest Diagnostics immunoassay. For more information, see www.questdiagnostics.com.




FOLLICLE-STIMULATING HORMONE
AgeMale (mIU/mL)Female (mIU/mL)0-4 yearsNot establishedNot established5-9 years0.21-4.330.72-5.3310-13 years0.53-4.920.87-9.1614-17 years0.85-8.740.64-10.98Data from Quest Diagnostics immunoassay. For more information, see www.questdiagnostics.com.

Chapter 10 Endocrinology	253


ESTRADIOLa
Age	Level (pg/mL)

Men	6-44
Luteal phase	26-165
Midcycle	118-355
aNormal infants have elevated estradiol at birth, which decreases to prepubertal values during the first week of life. Estradiol levels increase again between age 1 and 2 months and return to pre-pubertal values by age 6-12 months. Data from JHH Laboratories.
OCP, Oral contraceptive pill.


TESTOSTERONE, TOTAL SERUMa
AgeMale (ng/dL)Female (ng/dL)Cord blood17-6116-441-10 days=187=241-3 months72-344=173-5 months=201=125-7 months=59=137-12 months=16=111-5.9 years=5=86-7.9 years=25=208-10.9 years=42=3511-11.9 years=260=4012-13.9 years=420=4014-17.9 years=1000=40=18 (adult)250-11002-45TANNER STAGEStage I=5=8Stage II=167=24Stage III21-719=28Stage IV25-912=31Stage V110-975=33aNormal testosterone/dihydrotestosterone (T/DHT) ratio is <18 in adults and older children and <10 in neonates. A T/DHT ratio >20 suggests 5-a-reductase deficiency or androgen insensitivity syndrome.
Data from Quest Diagnostics LC/MS (liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry) assay.


TESTOSTERONE, FREE
AgeMale (pg/mL)Female (pg/mL)1-11 years=1.3=1.512-13 years=64.0=1.514-17 years4.0-100.0=3.618-69 years46.0-224.00.2-5.0Data from Quest Diagnostics LC/MS (liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry) assay.


c. Interpretation: Prepubertal children should show no or minimal increase in LH and FSH in response to GnRH. A rise of LH to >3.3 to
5.0 IU/L is evidence of central puberty.
3. Delayed puberty41,45,47: See Fig. 10.4 for information on evaluation and management of delayed puberty.
4. Precocious puberty42,47: See Fig. 10.5 for information on evaluation and management of precocious puberty.
C. Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome48
1. Clinical features in adolescents:
a. Diagnostic criteria (must have features of both):
(1) Hyperandrogenism: Either clinical or biochemical
(a) Clinical: Hirsutism, acne, male pattern alopecia
(b) Biochemical characteristics: Elevated androgens including DHEA-S (see Table 10.28 for normal values), free or total testosterone
(2) Menstrual abnormalities: Amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea (chronic anovulation).
NOTE: Appearance of multiple ovarian cysts is a diagnostic criterion for adults, but not for adolescents, as this can be a normal finding in adoles- cent females.
b. Common cause of female infertility.
c. Often LH>FSH, but this is not required for diagnosis.
d. Chronic anovulation and unopposed estrogen exposure increase risk for endometrial cancer.
e. Associated with insulin resistance and increased risk of type 2 diabetes.
2. Management:
a. Combined oral contraceptives: First-line for management of men- strual abnormalities and hirsutism/acne. Increases SHBG (thus decreasing free testosterone), which may result in increased insulin sensitivity and restoration of ovulation.
b. Anti-androgen therapy, such as spironolactone, to treat hirsutism.
c. Weight reduction and other lifestyle changes.
d. Metformin: Can be considered as possible treatment if goal is to treat insulin resistance.
D. Ambiguous Genitalia49
1. Clinical findings in a neonate suspicious for ambiguous genitalia:
a. Apparent female with clitoromegaly (length >1 cm or width >6 mm in term infant), inguinal or labial mass, or posterior labial fusion.
b. Micropenis (stretched penile length that is -2.5 SD below mean for age, see Table 10.29 for normal values).
c. Non-palpable gonads in an apparent male.
d. Hypospadias associated with separation of scrotal sacs or unde- scended testis.
e. Discordance between prenatal karyotype and genital appearance.


Initial evaluation
(1) History and physical exam
(2) Serum LH, FSH, and estradiol (girls) and testosterone (boys) measurement
(3) Bone age radiography
(4) If abnormal growth velocity, serum thyroid function testing, prolactin, IGF1 measurements
(5) If chronic disease suspected, directed testing


FSH or LH in prepubertal range

FSH or LH in normal pubertal range

FSH or LH above prepubertal range



  Dysmorphic features or history of radiation, trauma, or brain neoplasm?



Yes
 
Constitutional delay of growth and puberty likely; repeat measurements in 1 to 3 months

No
 Clinical features or laboratory findings suggest inadequate nutrition, stress, or chronic diesease?
Yes	No


Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism Potential etiologies: Primary gonadal failure secondary to Turner or Klinefelter syndromes, androgen insensitivity, trauma, tumor, or chemotherapy
Next steps: Repeat FSH/LH, consider karyotype, refer to endocrinology


Persistent hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Potential etiologies: Kallman syndrome; CNS trauma, surgery, radiation or tumors
Next steps: Refer to endocrinology


Functional hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Potential etiologies: Celiac disease, diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, inadequate nutrition (e.g., eating disorder), inflammatory bowel disease Next steps: Treat underlying cause


Constitutional delay of growth and puberty
Supported by delayed bone age and consistent family history. Next steps: Follow clinically; consider jump-start therapy with testosterone or transdermal estradiol; if no spontaneous puberty after 6 months or pubertal progression 4-6 months after jump start therapy, refer to endocrinology


 FIGURE 10.4 
An Approach to the Child Presenting With Delayed Puberty. CNS, Central nervous system; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; IGF1, insulin-like growth fac- tor 1; LH, luteinizing hormone; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. (From Klein DA, Emerick JE, Sylvester JE, Vogt KS. Disorders of puberty. An approach to diagnosis and management. Am Fam Physician. 2017;96(9):590-599.)




An Approach to the Child Presenting With Early Puberty. DHEA-S, Dehydro- epiandrosterone sulfate; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. (Reprinted with permission from Disorders of Puberty: An Approach to Diagnosis and Management, November 1, 2017, Vol 96, No 9, American Family Physician Copyright (c) 2017 American Academy of Family Physicians. All Rights Reserved.)


DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE SULFATE (DHEA-S)
AgeMale (mCg/dL)Female (mCg/dL)<1 months=31615-2611-6 months=58=747-11 months=26=261-3 years=15=224-6 years=27=347-9 years=91=9210-13 years=138=14814-17 years38-34037-307
continued
Chapter 10 Endocrinology	257


DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE SULFATE (DHEA-S)-CONT'D
Age	Male (mCg/dL)	Female (mCg/dL)
TANNER STAGES (AGES 7-17)I=49=46II=8115-133III22-12642-126IV33-17742-241V110-37045-320Data from Quest Diagnostics assay. For more information see www.questdiagnostics.com.


MEAN STRETCHED PENILE LENGTH (CM)a
Age	Mean ± SD	-2.5 SD

30 week gestation	2.5 ± 0.4	1.5
34 week gestation	3.0 ± 0.4	2.0
Full term	3.5 ± 0.4	2.5
0-5 months	3.9 ± 0.8	1.9
6-12 months	4.3 ± 0.8	2.3
1-2 years	4.7 ± 0.8	2.6
2-3 years	5.1 ± 0.9	2.9
3-4 years	5.5 ± 0.9	3.3
4-5 years	5.7 ± 0.9	3.5
5-6 years	6.0 ± 0.9	3.8
6-7 years	6.1 ± 0.9	3.9
7-8 years	6.2 ± 1.0	3.7
8-9 years	6.3 ± 1.0	3.8
9-10 years	6.3 ± 1.0	3.8
10-11 years	6.4 ± 1.1	3.7
Adult	13.3 ± 1.6	9.3
aMeasured from the pubic ramus to the tip of the glans while traction is applied along the length of the phallus to the point of increased resistance.
SD, standard deviation.
Data from Feldman KW, Smith DW. Fetal phallic growth and penile standards for newborn male infants. J Pediatr. 1975;86:395.

2. Etiology:
a. Due to undervirilization of male genitalia or virilization of female genitalia
b. Most common cause is CAH
c. Other causes by male versus female karyotype:
(1) 46,XY karyotype: Testicular regression, androgen insensitivity, testosterone biosynthesis disorders, rare forms of CAH, absence of SRY
(2) 46,XX karyotype: SRY+, classical (21-hydroxylase deficiency) or more rare forms of CAH
(3) Other: Sex chromosome mosaicism (46,XY/46,XX, 46,XY/45, XO, etc.)


3. Evaluation:
a. Labs: Timing of collection is important.
(1) Initial testing: LH, FSH, testosterone, dihydrotestosterone (DHT, see Table EC 10.D), anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) and expe- dited determination of sex chromosomes (ask that resulting lab rush results of sex chromosomes)
(2) After 36 hours of life: 17-hydroxyprogesterone
(3) Daily electrolytes until salt-wasting CAH is ruled out
(4) Further testing as needed to evaluate for more rare forms of CAH: DHEA, 17-hydroxypregnenolone, 11-deoxycortisol, cortisol, ACTH
b. Imaging: Options include genitogram (contrast study of the urogenital sinus and internal duct structures) or voiding cysto-urethrogram (VCUG), pelvic and abdominal US, and pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to evaluate internal anatomy.
c. Care should be taken to avoid premature gender/sex designation, completion of birth certificate, and naming of infant.
E. Cryptorchidism50
1. Epidemiology and clinical course:
a. Can be present at birth (congenital) or after birth (acquired). Congenital rate is 1% to 4.6% of males born >2.5 kg.
b. Increased risk with preterm birth or low birthweight.
c. About 1/3 to 1/2 of cryptorchid testicles descend spontaneously, usu- ally by age 3 months.
d. Neoplasm more common in males with cryptorchidism and may occur in contralateral testis; early orchidopexy decreases risk of malignancy.
e. Males with bilateral cryptorchidism have higher risk for reduced fertility.
f. There is a higher risk of testicular torsion prior to repair.
2. Evaluation:
a. Providers should palpate testes for quality and position in all males at each well child visit.
b. Any phenotypic male newborn with bilateral, nonpalpable testes should undergo evaluation for CAH with karyotype and hormonal profile.
c. In those without CAH, distinguish between cryptorchidism and anorchia (absent testes) with serum Müllerian inhibiting substance and consider additional hormone testing (inhibin B, FSH, LH, and testosterone).
3. Treatment: Observe for 6 months, at which time if testis remains unde- scended, referral to specialist recommended. Orchidopexy between 6 and 18 months of age recommended.



DIHYDROTESTOSTERONE
AgeMales (ng/dL)Females (ng/dL)Cord blood<2-8<2-51-6 months12-85<5Prepubertal<5<5Tanner stage II-III3-335-19Tanner stage IV-V22-753-30Data from Quest Diagnostics RIA (radioimmunoassay).






ANDROSTENEDIONE, SERUM
AgeMales (ng/dL)Females (ng/dL)Premature (31-35 weeks)=480=480Full-term infants=290=2901-12 months6-786-781-4 years5-515-515-9 years6-1156-11510-13 years12-22112-22114-17 years22-22522-225Tanner stage II-III17-8243-180Tanner stage IV-V57-15073-220Adult male (18-30 years)50-220Female follicular phase35-250Female luteal phase30-235Data from Quest Diagnostics LC/MS (liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry) analysis.

Chapter 10 Endocrinology	259

 VIII. NEONATAL HYPOGLYCEMIA EVALUATION51,52	
A. Definition
1. Serum glucose level insufficient to meet metabolic requirements. For practical purposes, value is defined as a point-of-care glucose (POCG)
<45 to 50 mg/dL within first 48 hours of life and <70 mg/dL beyond this period.
NOTE: Bedside glucometer is a convenient tool to screen for hypoglycemia but can be inaccurate by 10 to 15 mg/dL when in the range of hypo- glycemia. STAT plasma glucose must be sent to establish diagnosis of hypoglycemia.
B. Treatment Goals
1. For neonates with suspected congenital hypoglycemia disorder and infants/children with confirmed hypoglycemia disorder, maintain plasma glucose >70 mg/dL.
2. For high risk neonates without a suspected congenital hypoglycemia disorder, maintain plasma glucose >45 to 50 mg/dL for those <48 hours of age and >60 mg/dL for those aged >48 hours.
C. Management
See Chapter 18.
D. Further Work-up
1. If serum glucose is consistently <70 mg/dL after 48 hours of life, at the time of hypoglycemia (serum glucose <45 to 50 mg/dL via glucometer), obtain STAT serum glucose, insulin, growth hormone, cortisol, free fatty acids, and ß-hydroxybutyrate.
2. Consider glucagon stimulation test: Administer glucagon and obtain
serum glucose levels Q10 min ×4. Repeat growth hormone and cortisol levels 30 minutes after documented hypoglycemia.
E. Interpretation of Results
1. A rise in glucose =30 mg/dL on glucagon stimulation test, along with elevated plasma insulin levels >2 µU/mL (absence of detectable insulin does not rule out hyperinsulinism, as insulin may be present below
the lower limit of detection of the assay), low serum levels of free fatty acids (<1.5 mmol/L) and ß-hydroxybutyrate (<2 mmol/L), and a
persistent glucose requirement >8 mg/kg/min suggests a diagnosis of
hyperinsulinemia.
2. Hypoglycemia with midline defects and micropenis in a male suggest hypopituitarism, supported by low serum levels of growth hormone and cortisol at the time of hypoglycemia.
F. Hyperinsulinemia
1. Hyperinsulinemia is the most common cause of neonatal hypoglyce- mia beyond the first 7 days of life and may be congenital or transient.
2. Congenital hyperinsulinism can be caused by dominant or recessive mutations in genes responsible for regulating insulin secretion from pancreatic ß cells.

260	Part II  Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information

3. Transient hyperinsulinemia is commonly seen in infants of diabetic mothers and less commonly in the setting of perinatal asphyxia and intrauterine growth restriction.
4. Long-term management of persistent hyperinsulinism includes diazoxide, which inhibits pancreatic secretion of insulin by keep- ing ß-cell ATP-sensitive potassium channels open; however, it has been rarely associated with pulmonary hypertension (black box warning53).

 IX. ADDITIONAL NORMAL VALUES	
Normal values may differ among laboratories because of variation in tech- nique and type of assay used.
   See the following tables for normal values: Table EC 10.A, Catecholamines, urine
Table EC 10.B, Catecholamines, plasma
Table EC 10.C, Insulin-like growth factor binding protein Table EC 10.D, DHT
Table EC 10.E, Androstenedione, serum

 X. WEB RESOURCES	
A. Children with Diabetes (www.childrenwithdiabetes.com)
B. American Diabetes Association (www.diabetes.org)
C. International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (www.ispad.org)
D. Pediatric Endocrine Society (www.lwpes.org)
E. The Endocrine Society (www.endocrine.org)
F. American Thyroid Association (www.thyroid.org)

 REFERENCES	
A complete list of references can be found online at www.expertconsult.com.

 REFERENCES	
1. American Diabetes Association. Classification and diagnosis of diabetes diagno- sis: standards of medical care in diabetes-2019. Diabetes Care. 2019;42(suppl 1):S13-S28.
2. Mayer-Davis EJ, Kahkoska AR, Jefferies C, et al. ISPAD Clinical Practice Consensus Guidelines 2018: definition, epidemiology, and classification of diabe- tes in children and adolescents. Pediatr Diabetes. 2018;19(suppl 27):7-19.
3. International Expert Committee report on the role of the A1c assay in the diag- nosis of diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2009;32:1327-1334.
4. Hattersley AT, Greeley SAW, Polak M, et al. ISPAD clinical practice consensus guidelines 2018: the diagnosis and management of monogenic diabetes in chil- dren and adolescents. Pediatr Diabetes. 2018;19(suppl 27):47-63.
5. Steck AK, Winter WE. Review on monogenic diabetes. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2011;18:252-258.
6. American Diabetes Association. Children and adolescents: standards of medical care in diabetes-2019. Diabetes Care. 2019;42(suppl 1):S148-S164.
7. Zeitler P, Arslanian S, Fu J, et al. ISPAD clinical practice consensus guidelines 2018: type 2 diabetes in youth. Pediatr Diabetes. 2018;19(suppl 27):28-46.
8. Copeland KC, Silverstein J, Moore KR, et al. Management of newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in children and adolescents. Pediatrics. 2013;131:364-382.
9. American Diabetes Association. Diabetes technology: standards of medical care in diabetes-2019. Diabetes Care. 2019;42(suppl 1):S71-S80.
10. Peters AL, Ahmann AJ, Battelino T, et al. Diabetes technology-continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion therapy and continuous glucose monitoring in adults: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016;101(11):3922-3937.
11. American Diabetes Association. Microvascular complications and foot care: standards of medical care in diabetes-2019. Diabetes Care. 2019;42(suppl 1):S124-S138.
12. Cooke DW, Plotnick L. Management of diabetic ketoacidosis in children and adolescents. Pediatr Rev. 2008;29:431-436.
13. Wolfsdorg JI, Glaser N, Agus M, et al. ISPAD clinical practice consensus guide- lines 201: diabetic ketoacidosis and hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state. Pediatr Diabetes. 2014;19(suppl 27):155-177.
14. Fisher DA. The thyroid. In: Rudolph CD, Rudolph AM, Lister GE, et al., eds.
Rudolph's Pediatrics. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2011.
15. Fisher DA. Thyroid function and dysfunction in premature infants. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2007;4:317-328.
16. Büyükgebiz A. Newborn screening for congenital hypothyroidism. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2006;19:1291-1298.
17. Lem AJ, de Rijke YB, van Toor H, et al. Serum thyroid hormone levels in healthy children from birth to adulthood and in short children born small for gestational age. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97:3170-3178.
18. Williams FL, Simpson J, Delahunty C, et al. Developmental trends in cord and postpartum serum thyroid hormones in preterm infants. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004;89:5314-5320.
19. Reinehr T. Thyroid function in the nutritionally obese child and adolescent. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2011;23:415-420.
20. Screening for congenital hypothyroidism: US Preventative Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation. Ann Fam Med. 2008;6:166.

260.e2	Part II  Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information

21. Carroll R, Matfin G. Endocrine and metabolic emergencies: thyroid storm. Ther Adv Endocrinol Metab. 2010;1(3):139-145.
22. Ross AC, Manson JE, Abrams SA, et al. The 2011 report on dietary reference intakes for calcium and vitamin D from the Institute of Medicine: what clinicians need to know. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;96:53-58.
23. Greer FR. Defining vitamin D deficiency in children: beyond 25-OH vitamin D serum concentrations. Pediatrics. 2009;124:1471-1473.
24. Misra M, Pacaud D, Petryk A, et al. Vitamin D deficiency in children and its management: review of current knowledge and recommendations. Pediatrics. 2008;122:398-417.
25. Stewart PM. The adrenal cortex. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Reed Larsen P, et al., eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011.
26. American Academy of Pediatrics, Section on Endocrinology and Committee on Genetics. Technical report: congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Pediatrics. 2000;106:1511-1518.
27. Autal Z, Zhou P. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia: diagnosis, evaluation, and management. Pediatr Rev. 2009;30:e49-e57.
28. Autal Z, Zhou P. Addison disease. Pediatr Rev. 2009;30:491-493.
29. Stratakis CA. Cushing syndrome in pediatrics. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2012;41:793-803.
30. Auron M, Nouhad R. Adrenal insufficiency. Pediatr Rev. 2015;36(3):92-103.
31. Klein J, Vugin P, et al. Cushing syndrome. Pediatr Rev. 2014;35(9):405-407.
32. Edmonds S, Fein DM, Gurtman A. Pheochromocytoma. Pediatr Rev.
2011;32:308-310.
33. Lenders JW, Pacak K, Walther MM, et al. Biomedical diagnosis of pheochromo- cytoma: which test is best? JAMA. 2002;287:1427-1434.
34. Weise M, Merke DP, Pacak K, et al. Utility of plasma free metanephrines for detecting childhood pheochromocytoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002;87:1955-1960.
35. Robinson AG, Verbalis JG. Posterior pituitary. In: Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Reed Larsen P, et al., eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011.
36. Plotnick L, Miller R. Growth, growth hormone, and pituitary disorders. In: McMillan J, ed. Oski's Pediatrics: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006:2084-2092.
37. MacGillivray MH. The basics for the diagnosis and management of short stature: a pediatric endocrinologist's approach. Pediatr Ann. 2000;29:570-575.
38. Rose S, Cook D, et al. Growth hormone therapy guidelines: clinical and managed care perspectives. Am J Pharm Benefits. 2014;6(5):e134-e146.
39. Norman RJ, Dewailly D, Legro RS, et al. Polycystic ovary syndrome. Lancet. 2007;370:685-697.
40. Styne DM. New aspects in the diagnosis and treatment of pubertal disorders.
Pediatr Clin North Am. 1997;44:505-529.
41. Kaplowitz PB. Delayed puberty. Pediatr Rev. 2010;31:189-195.
42. Carel JC, Leger J. Clinical practice. Precocious puberty. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2366-2377.
43. American Academy of Pediatrics. Committee on Genetics, Sections on Endocrinology and Urology. Evaluation of newborn with developmental anoma- lies of the external genitalia. Pediatrics. 2000;106:138-142.
44. Blondell R, Foster MB, Dave KC. Disorders of puberty. Am Fam Physician. 1999;60:209-218.

Chapter 10 Endocrinology	260.e3

45. Master-Hunter T, Heiman DL. Amenorrhea: evaluation and treatment. Am Fam Physician. 2006;73:1374-1382.
46. Carel JC, Eugster EA, Rogol A, et al. Consensus statement on the use of gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogs in children. Pediatrics. 2009;123:e752-e762.
47. Klein DA, Emerick JE, Sylvester JE, Vogt KS. Disorders of puberty: an approach to diagnosis and management. Am Fam Physician. 2017;96(9):590-599.
48. Legro RS, Arslanian SA, Ehrmann DA, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of poly- cystic ovary syndrome: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98(12):4565-4592.
49. Mcann-Crosby B. Ambiguous genitalia: evaluation and management in the newborn. NeoReviews. 2017;17(3):e144-e153.
50. Kolon TF, Herndon CDA, Baker LA, et al. Evaluation and Treatment of Cryptorchidism: American Urological Association Guideline; 2014.
51. Fourtner SH, Stanley CA. Genetic and nongenetic forms of hyperinsulinism in neonates. NeoReviews. 2004;5(9):e370-e376.
52. Thompon-Branch A, Havranek T. Neonatal hypoglycemia. Pediatr Rev. 2017;38(4):147-157.
53. Timlin MR, Black AB, et al. Development of pulmonary hypertension during treatment with diazoxide. A case series and literature review. Pediatr cardiol. 2017;38(6):1247-1250.
54. Danne T, Phillip M, Buckingham BA, et al. ISPAD Clinical Practice Consensus Guidelines 2018: insulin treatment in children and adolescents with diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes. 2018;19(suppl 27):115-135.
55. Jonklass J, Bianco AC, Bauer AJ, et al. Guidelines for the treatment of hypothy- roidism. Thyroid. 2014;24(12):1670-1751.
56. Leger J, Olivieri A, Donaldson M, et al. European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology consensus guidelines on screening, diagnosis, and management of congenital hypothyroidism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99(2):363-384.

Chapter 11
Fluids and Electrolytes
Lauren Burgunder, MD

 See additional content on Expert Consult

 I. INTRODUCTION	
Intravenous fluids (IVFs) should be thought of as a medication by those who prescribe them. Since the late 1950s, IVF choice has been largely guided by Holliday and Segar's estimations of sodium requirements. Using the electrolyte composition of human milk, they calculated that the average child requires 3 mEq sodium (Na) and 2 mEq potassium (K) per 100 to 120 mL water (H2O).1 According to their calculation, basic solute needs can be met by administer- ing 1/4 normal saline (NS), a hypotonic fluid. While this estimation led to a
long-standing tradition in pediatric maintenance IVF (MIVF) therapy, evidence published over the past few decades culminated in new American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) guidelines recommending isotonic fluids as the maintenance fluid of choice for the majority of hospitalized children.2

 II. FLUID RESUSCITATION	
A. Calculating Maintenance Fluid Volume
1. The Holliday-Segar method (Table 11.1 and Box 11.1) is the most widely used method to approximate maintenance fluid volume. This method estimates caloric expenditure in fixed-weight categories and assumes the average patient will require 100 mL of water for each 100 calories metabolized, with approximately 100 kcal burned per kg.1
2. NOTE: The Holliday-Segar method is not suitable for neonates <14 days old, because it generally overestimates fluid needs in neonates. (See Chapter 18 for neonatal fluid management.)
B. Calculating Fluid Loss
1. Total body water (TBW) is equal to 60% of a child's weight in kg (75% in infants).3
EQUATION 11.1: TBWa = weight (kg) ? 0.6
aTBW uses preillness weight; 1 L water = 1 kg water
2. In a euvolemic child, 60% of TBW resides in the intracellular compart- ment [where potassium (K) concentration is 140 mEq/L and sodium (Na) is negligible], and 40% of TBW is in the extracellular compartment (where Na concentration is ~140 mEq/L and K is negligible).4-6
3. The most precise method of assessing fluid deficit uses weight loss:
EQUATION 11.2: Fluid deficit (L) = preillness weight (kg) - illness
weight (kg)

262	Part II  Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information

TABLE 11.1HOLLIDAY-SEGAR METHODFluid VolumeBody WeightmL/kg/daymL/kg/hrFirst 10 kg100˜4Second 10 kg50˜2Each additional kg20˜1BOX 11.1HOLLIDAY-SEGAR METHODExample: Determine the correct fluid rate for an 8-year-old child weighing 25 kg:
First 10 kg:	4 mL/kg/hr × 10 kg = 40 mL/hr  100 mL/kg/day × 10 kg = 1000 mL/day
Second 10 kg:	2 mL/kg/hr × 10 kg = 20 mL/hr  50 mL/kg/day × 10 kg = 500 mL/day
Each additional  1 mL/kg/hr × 5 kg = 5 mL/hr	20 mL/kg/day × 5 kg = 100 mL/day
1 kg:
Answer: 65 mL/hr	Answer: 1600 mL/day

TABLE 11.2CLINICAL OBSERVATIONS IN DEHYDRATION7Older Child3% (30 mL/kg)6% (60 mL/kg)9% (90 mL/kg)Infant5% (50 mL/kg)10% (100 mL/kg)15% (150 mL/kg)Dehydration
Classification	Mild
Moderate
SevereMental status	AlertLethargic/obtundedFontanelle	FlatSoftSunkenEyes	NormalDeep setSunkenTears	PresentReducedNoneBuccal mucosa/lips	DryDryParched/crackedPulse rate	NormalSlightly increasedIncreasedSkin (touch)	NormalDryClammySkin turgor	NormalTentingNoneCapillary refill	Normal˜2-3 seconds>3 secondsPulse quality	NormalWeakFeeble/impalpableUrine output	Normal/mild oliguriaMild oliguriaSevere oliguria
4. Clinical assessment: If weight loss is not known, clinical observation may be used to approximate the percentage of dehydration
(Table 11.2).7,8

EQUATION 11.3:	Dehydration =	fluid deficita
preillness weight

× 100 %

a1 % dehydration = 10 mL/ kg of fluid deficit;
a1 L of water= 1 kg of water


5. In a healthy child, insensible fluid volume loss is approximated as
? of the Holliday-Segar MIVF per day. NOTE: This calculation is based on fluid requirements of healthy children. Many hospital-
ized children have increased insensible losses (e.g., secondary to fever or increased respiratory rate) that must be factored into fluid determinations.
C. Maintenance Fluid Choice in Hospitalized Children
1. Based on a growing body of evidence, the AAP recommends
isotonic fluid as the most appropriate MIVF therapy for the vast
majority of hospitalized children between the ages of 28 days and 18 years.2 See Table 11.3 for isotonic fluid options.
2. Various disease states can lead to an increased secretion of antidiuretic hormone (ADH), which promotes the retention of free water, leading to hyponatremia.9,10 See Box 11.2 for examples.
3. Exceptions exist in certain patient populations, such as children with neuro- surgical disorders, congenital or acquired cardiac disease, hepatic disease, cancer, acute kidney injury, chronic kidney disease, nephrotic syndrome, diabetes insipidus, and voluminous watery diarrhea or severe burns.2
4. See Table 11.3 and Table 11.4 for electrolyte composition of various parenteral and enteral fluid replacement options.
5. Unless hyperkalemia is present or the child is in renal failure, mainte- nance potassium requirements (20 mEq/L of fluid) should be given.11 Do not add potassium (K+) to fluids until urine output has been established.12,13
D. Volume Replacement Strategy7,12,13
1. Volume resuscitation and deficit replacement should generally be com- pleted over 24 hours.
2. See Table 11.5 for a three-phase approach to fluid replacement.
3. Children with isonatremic hypovolemia can be repleted with isotonic fluid per AAP recommendations.2 See Box 11.3 for sample calculations in isonatremic hypovolemia.
4. If ongoing losses can be measured directly, they should be replaced 1:1 concurrently with maintenance fluid administration. If the losses cannot be measured, an estimate of 10 mL /kg body weight for each watery stool and 2 mL /kg body weight for each episode of emesis should be administered.3 See Table 11.6 for electrolyte composition of certain bodily fluids.
5. Oral intake is the preferred method for repletion and maintenance, if possible.

 III. ELECTROLYTE MANAGEMENT	
See Chapter 28 for age specific normal values of electrolytes.
A. Serum Osmolality and Tonicity2,7,14
1. Fluids can be expressed in terms of their tonicity and their osmolality.



COMPOSITION OF FREQUENTLY USED PARENTERAL REHYDRATION FLUIDS
D% CHO (g/100 mL) Proteina (g/100 mL) Cal/L	Na (mEq/L)	K+ (mEq/L) Cl- (mEq/L) HCO3-b (mEq/L) Mg2+  Ca2+ (mEq/L) mOsm/L

HYPOTONIC
D5W	5	-	170	-	-	-	-	-	-	252
D5 1/4 NS (0.225% NaCl)	5	-	170	38.5	-	34	-	-	-	329
ISOTONIC
Plamalyte	-	-	-	140	5	98	27	3	294
NS (0.9% NaCl)	-	-	-	154	-	154	-	-	-	308
HYPERTONIC
2% NaCl	-	-	-	342	-	342	-	-	-	684


8.4% sodium bicarbonate
(1 mEq/mL)
COLLOID

-	-	-	1000	-	-	1000	-	-	2000

Plasmanate	-	5	200	110	2	50	29	-	-	-
Albumin 25% (salt poor)	-	25	1000	100-160	-	<120	-	-	-	300
aProtein or amino acid equivalent.
bBicarbonate or equivalent (citrate, acetate, lactate).
cValues are approximate; may vary from lot to lot. Also contains < 1.2% egg phosphatides.
CHO, Carbohydrate; HCO -, bicarbonate; NS, normal saline.


CLINICAL SETTING OF INCREASED ADH RELEASE IN CHILDREN7,26

Hemodynamic Stimuli for ADH Release (Decreased Effective Volume)
Hypovolemia Nephrosis Cirrhosis
Congestive heart failure Hypoaldosteronism Hypotension Hypoalbuminemia

Nonosmotic and Nonhemodynamic Stimuli for ADH Release
CNS disturbances (infection, brain tumors, head injury, thrombosis)
Pulmonary disease (pneumonia, asthma, bronchiolitis, PPV)
Cancer
Medications (MDMA, AEDs, cytoxan, vincris- tine, opiates, TCAs, SSRIs)
GI disturbances (nausea and emesis) Pain or stress
Postoperative state

ADH, Antidiuretic hormone; AED, antiepileptic drugs; CNS, central nervous system; GI, gas- trointestinal; MDMA, 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (ecstasy); PPV; positive pressure ventilation; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; TCA, tricyclic antidepressant.

2. Serum osmolality (285 to 295 mOsm/kg) is a measure of both permeable and nonpermeable solutes and is calculated using the following equation:
EQUATION 11.4: Osmolality = 2 Na + glucose (mg / dL) + BUN (mg / dL)
18	2 . 8
3. Osmolality is measured as osmoles per weight (kg) versus osmolarity, which is measured as osmoles per volume (L).
4. Tonicity is effective osmolality. It is the net force on water across a semi- permeable membrane (e.g., the cell membrane) based on the osmotic pressures. It is relative and determined largely by sodium content. Substances that flow freely across membranes, such as urea, are inef- fective osmoles and influence osmolality but not tonicity.
B. Sodium
The equations within this section are theoretical and are not validated. They offer a starting point for calculation of electrolyte abnormalities, but clinical context is ALWAYS of the utmost importance and frequent monitoring is necessary. Children with neurosurgical disorders, cardiac disease, hepatic disease, cancer, kidney disease, diabetes insipidus, and severe burns may require consultation with subspecialists before fluid choice and volume is administered. When correcting dysnatremias, frequent lab monitoring (~2 to 4 hours) is indicated with adjustment of fluid type and rate as needed.
1. Hyponatremia: Excess Na loss (Na <135 mEq/L)
a. Clinical manifestations and differential diagnosis (Table 11.7)
b. Pseudohyponatremia etiologies:
(1) Increased serum osmolality: Hyperglycemia: Na artificially decreased 1.6 mEq/L for each 100-mg/dL rise in glucose
(2) Normal serum osmolality:
(a) Hyperlipidemia: Na artificially decreased by 0.002 × lipid (mg/dL)






COMPOSITION OF ORAL REHYDRATION FLUIDS

ORAL FLUIDSD% CHO (g/100 mL)Na (mEq/L)K+ (mEq/L)Cl- (mEq/L)HCO3-b (mEq/L)Ca2+ (mEq/L)mOsm/LPedialyte2.545203530-250WHO solution290208030-310Rehydralyte2.575206530-310COMMONLY CONSUMED FLUIDS (NOT RECOMMENDED FOR ORAL REHYDRATION)aApple juice11.90.426---700Coca-Cola10.94.30.1-13.4-656Gatorade5.9212.517--377G24.7203.2---Ginger ale93.50.1-3.6-565Milk4.922362830-260Orange juice10.40.249-50-654Powerade5.8182.7---264aElectrolyte values are approximate
bBicarbonate or equivalent (citrate, acetate, lactate).
CHO, Carbohydrate; HCO -, bicarbonate; NS, normal saline; WHO, World Health Organization




VOLUME REPLACEMENT STRATEGY
Phase I	Phase II	Phase III


Initial stabilization

Deficit repletion, maintenance volume, and ongoing losses

Recovery and ongoing losses


aShould be used in patients in need of rapid volume expansion. See Box 11.3 for sample calculation















(b) Hyperproteinemia: Na artificially decreased by 0.25 × [protein (g/dL) - 8]
c. Management
(1) The traditional equation used to calculate the excess sodium deficit in hyponatremia is:
EQUATION 11.53:
Na deficit(mEq)a = [Desired Na (mEq/L) - Serum Na (mEq/L)]
× TBW (L)
aThis represents the excess sodium deficit in hyponatremic dehydration. It must be added to the daily sodium requirement for hospitalized patients of
~14 mEq/100 mL fluid given.
(2) Hyponatremia should be corrected by no more than 10 to 12
mEq per 24 hr to avoid rapid change of serum sodium, which can cause osmotic demyelination syndrome.6,13,15




ELECTROLYTE COMPOSITION OF VARIOUS FLUIDS
Source of FluidNa+ (mEq/L)K+ (mEq/L)Cl- (mEq/L)Gastric20-805-20100-150Pancreatic120-1405-1590-120Small bowel100-1405-1590-130Bile120-1405-1580-120Ileostomy45-1353-1520-115Diarrhea10-9010-8010-110Skin with burnsa1405110Sweat Normal
10-30
3-10
10-35Cystic fibrosisb50-1305-2550-110a3-5 g/dL of protein may be lost in fluid from burn wounds.
bReplacement fluid dependent on sodium content.
Modified from Kliegman RM, Stanton B, St. Gene J, et al. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 19th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011.


HYPONATREMIA7,14


Related to rate of change: Nausea, headache, muscle cramps, weakness, confusion, apnea, lethargy, seizure, coma, hypothermia, depressed DTRs
ETIOLOGIESHypovolemicEuvolemicHypervolemicRenal LossesExtrarenal LossesNa-losing nephropathyGI lossesSIADH (see Chapter 10)  NephroticDiureticsSkin lossesExcess salt-freesyndromeJuvenile nephronopthisisThird spacinginfusionsHypoalbuminemiaHypoaldosteronism (CAH,Cystic fibrosisDesmopressin acetateHeart failurepseudohypoaldosteron-Water intoxicationCirrhosisism, UTI/obstruction)HypothyroidismRenal failureCerebral salt-wastingSepsisGlucocorticoidsyndromePrimary polydipsiacdeficiencyPostobstructive diuresisMalnutritioncATN (polyuric phase)LABORATORY DATA? Urine Na (> 20 mEq/L)? Urine Na (< 20? Urine volume? Urine Nab? Urine volumemEq/L)? Specific gravity(< 20 mEq/L)? Specific gravity? Urine volume? Urine osmolality (>? Urine volume? Urine osmolalitya? Specific gravity100 mOsm/L)(< 100 mOsm/L)? Urine osmolality(> 100 mOsm/L)MANAGEMENTReplace losses (see hypovolemic hyponatremia)	Restrict fluids
Address the underlying cause

aMinimum possible urine osmolality = 50 mOsm/kg
bUrine Na may be appropriate for the level of Na intake in patients with SIADH and water intoxication.
cUrine osmolality is <100 mOsm/L
ATN, Acute tubular necrosis; CAH, congenital adrenal hyperplasia; DTR, deep tendon reflex; GI, gastrointestinal; Na, sodium; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion; UTI, urinary tract infection.

(3) Witnessed onset of hyponatremia over the course of hours does not pose as great of a risk and can be corrected in a similar amount of time that it developed.7
(4) If central nervous system (CNS) symptoms are present, hyper- tonic saline (HTS) should be administered over 3 to 4 hours to correct the hyponatremia by ~5 mEq/L.5,6,11 Use Equation 11.7 to determine rate of HTS.
(5) To determine the sodium content of the fluid necessary for repletion:
EQUATION 11.6:
Na content (mEq / L) =
[Na deficit + (14 mEq / 100 mL × maintenance fluid volume [ mL])
volume deficita
aUse daily maintenance volume requirements if euvolemic
(6) Once the fluid type is determined, the starting rate can be calcu- lated using the following:
EQUATION 11.7:
Fluid rate ( mL / hour) =	Na deficit ( mEq) × 1000 mL
infusate Na ( mEq) × hours IVF will run ina day
(7) See Box 11.4 and 11.5 for sample calculations in hyponatremic dehydration.
2. Hypernatremia: Excess free water loss (Na >145 mEq/L)
a. Clinical manifestations and differential diagnosis (Table 11.8)
b. Management
(1) Hypernatremic hypovolemia occurs in scenarios in which free water is either unavailable/restricted or there is excessive loss of solute-free water (see Table 11.8).
(2) Hypernatremia is dangerous because of complications from potential treatment sequelae, the most serious of which is cerebral edema.4,7
(3) Plan to correct the serum Na by no more than 10 mEq/24 hours and correct the free water deficit over 48 hours to minimize the risk of cerebral edema.4,10,11,16
(4) As with hyponatremia, witnessed onset of hypernatremia over the course of hours can be corrected rapidly; this is because the brain has not had time to produce idiogenic osmoles to adapt to the change in osmolality.7,11
(5) Expert opinion recommends starting with D5 1/2 NS.16 However, the sodium and fluid needs can also be calculated.
(6) The free water deficit is as follows:
EQUATION 11.84,6:	a
FWD (mL) = TBW (mL) × 1 -

aThe difference in desired and serum Na should be no more than 10 mEq/L/day

BOX 11.4
SAMPLE CALCULATIONS: HYPONATREMIC DEHYDRATION
Example: A 15-kg (preillness weight) child with 10% dehydration and serum sodium 125 mEq/L without central nervous system symptoms
Requirement	Formula	Sample Calculation

Maintenance fluid requirements

Holliday-Segar formula	(100 mL/kg/d × 10 kg) + (50 mL/kg/d × 5 kg) =
1250 mL/24 hr = 52 mL/hr

Fluid deficit	Equation 11.2 or Equation 11.3	10 mL × 15 kg × 10% =
1500 mL
Fluid Replacement Rate Over 24 hrs
1500 mL/24 hr = 63 mL/hr + 52 mL/hr maintenance = 115 mL/hr
Calculations for Fluid Selection

Maintenance sodium requirements

3 mEq per 100 mL of mainte- nance fluid

3 mEq × (1250 mL/100 mL) =
38 mEq Na+

Isotonic sodium deficit	8-10 mEq Na+ per each 100 mL
of fluid deficit

10 mEq × (1500 mL/100 mL)
= 150 mEq Na+

Sodium deficit	Equation 11.5	(135 mEq - 125 mEq) × 9 =
90 mEq Na+
Total sodium content	Equation 11.6	90 mEq + (14 mEq/100ml × 1250) = 265 mEq

Sodium required per L	Divide total sodium by fluid
deficit in L

278 mEq/1.5 L = 185 mEq





(7) The FWD is used to calculate the solute fluid deficit (SFD) (i.e., the amount of fluid that contains electrolytes).
EQUATION 11.9: SFD = Fluid Deficit a - FWD
aSee equation 11.2 for fluid deficit calculations

(8) Despite the hypernatremia, there is also a Na deficit that should be accounted for:




HYPERNATREMIA7,25 CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS


ETIOLOGIES
Low urine osmolality	Elevated urine osmolalityb

? Urine Na (< 20 mEq/L)	? Urine Na (> 20 mEq/L)

Diabetes insipidus (central and nephrogenic) (see Chapters 10 and 19)
Postobstructive diuresis CKD
Diuretic use
Polyuric phase of ATN
MANAGEMENT

GI losses Skin losses Respiratorya
Increased insensible losses Adipsia

Exogenous Na+ (meds, infant formula)
Mineralocorticoid excess (e.g., hyperaldosteronism)



aThis cause of hypernatremia is usually secondary to free water loss; therefore the fractional excretion of sodium may be decreased or normal.
b>1000 mosm/kg
ATN, Acute tubular necrosis; CKD, chronic kidney disease; GI, gastrointestinal; Na, sodium.

EQUATION 11.10:
Na required ( mEq) = [SFD ( mL) + maintenance fluid volume ( mL)] × 14 mEq
100mL

(9) The amount of sodium is then divided by the total fluid deficit in addition to the maintenance fluid volume. This will help approxi- mate the fluid tonicity required.
EQUATION 11.11:
Na content of fluid (mEq / L) =	Na required (mEq)
Fluid Deficit (L) + maintenance fluid volume (L)
(10) See Box 11.6 for sample calculations in hypernatremic dehydration.
(11) If the fluid necessary contains >154 mEq of Na, then the fol- lowing equation can be used to make a 1-L bag at the desired tonicity:16
EQUATION 11.12:
mL of 3 % saline= 1000 mL × desired Na ( mEq/ L) - 154 ( mEq / L)
513 ( mEq / L) - desired Na ( mEq / L)
(12) This equation can also be used to calculate rate to run HTS with NS bolus in a severely hypernatremic child. See Box 11.7.













Free water deficitEquation 11.84 mL/kg × 15 kg × (155 mEq/L - 145 mEq/L)= 600 mLSolute fluid deficitEquation 11.91500 mL - 600 mL = 900 mLTotal sodium requiredEquation 11.10(900 mL + 1250 mL) × 14 mEq/100 mL = 300
mEq Na+Na content of fluidEquation 11.11300 mEq / (1.25 + 1.5 L) = 110 mEq Na
BOX 11.7
SAMPLE CALCULATIONS: SEVERE HYPERNATREMIC DEHYDRATION
Initial Fluid Resuscitation Strategy to Avoid Rapid Sodium Correction when Serum Na+ >175 mEq/L16
Example: A 3-kg (preillness-weight) breastfed neonate appearing severely dehydrated with serum sodium 185 mEq/L and hemodynamic instability
Resuscitation with normal saline (NS) may drop the serum Na+ too quickly. Plan to simultane- ously run NS and 3% hypertonic saline (HTS), given rapidly together (i.e., over 5 minutes),
to effectively give resuscitation fluid with a concentration no more than 15 mEq/L below the child's serum Na+. Repeat the boluses as needed to achieve hemodynamic stability.
Requirement	Formula	Sample Calculation

Ideal bolus fluid concentration

Serum sodium
(in mEq/L) - 15 mEq/L

185 mEq/L - 15 mEq/L
= 170 mEq/L

mL of HTS required per L of NS

Equation 11.12	1000 mL × (170 mEq/L -
154 mEq/L) / (513 mEq/L
- 170 mEq/L) = 47 mL

Bolus NS amount in mL	20 mL/kg × wt (in kg)	20 mL/kg × 3 kg = 60 mL

Bolus amount HTS in mL mL HTS required per L of NS × NS
bolus amount (in mL) / 1000 mL

47 mL × 60 mL / 1000 mL
= 2.8 mL

Note: In clinical practice, one will often not have laboratory data available quickly enough to employ this strategy. However, severe hypernatremia should be suspected in the clinical
scenario of a solely breastfed neonate who appears severely dehydrated.16 STAT labs should be sent, and this strategy may be employed as soon as laboratory values are available.

3. Calculations pertaining to dysnatremias can be double-checked using the following equation:
EQUATION 11.13:4-6

Change in Serum Na


1L of parenteral fluid administration

C. Potassium
1. Hypokalemia

= (Infusate Na + Infusate K) - Serum Na
TBW + 1

a. Clinical manifestations and differential diagnosis (Table 11.9)
b. The transtubular potassium gradient (TTKG) can help differentiate between etiologies of hypokalemia, as noted in Table 11.9:
EQUATION 11.14:7
7TTKGa =  [K]urine  ×	plasma osmolality

[K]plasma

urine osmolality

 aThe urine osmolality must be greater than the serum osmolality for the calculation to be valid
c. Management: Potassium infusion rates generally should not exceed 1 mEq/kg/hr.3
2. Hyperkalemia
a. Clinical manifestations and differential diagnosis (Table 11.10)
b. Management (Fig. 11.1)
D. Calcium
1. Hypocalcemia
a. Clinical manifestations and differential diagnosis (Table 11.11)
b. Special considerations:
i. Albumin readily binds serum calcium. Correction for albumin: ? of 1 g/dL changes the total serum calcium in the same direction by 0.8 mg/dL.
ii. pH: Acidosis increases ionized calcium.
iii. Symptoms of hypocalcemia refractory to calcium supplementation may be caused by hypomagnesemia.
iv. Significant hyperphosphatemia should be corrected before the correction of hypocalcemia because renal calculi or soft-tissue
calcification may occur if total [Ca2+] × [PO43-] = 70.7
2. Hypercalcemia: Table 11.11
E. Magnesium
1. Hypomagnesemia: Table 11.12
2. Hypermagnesemia: Table 11.12
F. Phosphate
1. Hypophosphatemia: Table 11.13
2. Hyperphosphatemia: Table 11.13



HYPOKALEMIA7,25
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

ETIOLOGIES
	Metabolic Alkalosis	
HypertensiveNormotensiveMetabolic AcidosisNo Change in Serum pHExtrarenalNormal StoresaRenovascular diseaseGitleman syndromeRTA (type I and II)Meds (amphotericin, cis-Skin lossesAcute metabolic alkalosisExcess reninBartter syndromeDKAplatin, aminoglycosides,GI losses/laxative abuse/enema abuseHyperinsulinemiaCushing syndromeHypoparathyrodismUretosigmoidoscopypenicillin or penicillinClay ingestionLeukocytosis (if sample sits atCAHCystic fibrosisFanconi Syndromederivatives, diuretics)Kayexalateroom temperature)Adrenal adenomaEAST syndromeInterstitial nephritisMalnutrition/Anorexia nervosaMeds (adrenergic agonists,Licorice ingestionLoop and thiazide diureticstheophylline, toluene,Liddle syndromeEmesiscesium chloride, hydroxy-chloroquine, barium)Familial hypokalemic periodic
  paralysis FamilialLABORATORY DATA
MANAGEMENT

Chronic	Determine daily requirement and replace with potassium chloride or potassium gluconate.
aBlood pressure may vary.
CAH, Congenial adrenal hyperplasia; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis; GI, gastrointestinal; K +, potassium; RTA, renal tubular acidosis; EAST, epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubulopathy; TTKG, transtubular potassium gradient.




HYPERKALEMIA7
Skeletal muscle weakness, fasciculations, paresthesias, and ascending paralysis. The typical ECG progression with increasing serum K+ values:
1. Peaked T waves
2. Prolonged PR and widening of QRS
3. Loss of P waves
4. ST segment depression with further widening of QRS
5. Bradycardia, atrioventricular (AV) block, ventricular arrhythmias, torsades de pointes, and cardiac arrest

Increased total body K+	Intracellular shifts (no
Increased urine K+  Decreased urine K+	change in total body K+)










aFor every 0.1-unit reduction in arterial pH, there is approximately a 0.2-0.4 mEq/L increase in plasma K+.
bFor every platelet increase of 100,000/µL, there is a 0.15 mEq/L increase in serum K+.
ACE, Angiotensin converting enzyme; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis; ECG, electrocardiogram; K+, potassium; NSAIDS, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; RTA, renal tubular acidosis; TMX, trimethoprim.


A. Determine the pH
The body does not fully compensate for primary acid-base disorders; there- fore the primary disturbance will shift the pH away from 7.40.
1. Acidemia (pH < 7.35):
a. Respiratory acidosis: PCO2 > 45 mm Hg
b. Metabolic acidosis: Arterial bicarbonate < 20 mmol/L
2. Alkalemia (pH > 7.45):
a. Respiratory alkalosis: PCO2 < 35 mm Hg
b. Metabolic alkalosis: Arterial bicarbonate > 28 mmol/L






HyperkalemiaK+ > 6 mEq/L




















 FIGURE 11.1 
Algorithm for hyperkalemia. CRM, Cardiorespiratory monitor; D25W, 25% dextrose in water; ECG, electrocardiogram; INH, inhaled; IV, intravenous.




HYPOCALCEMIA AND HYPERCALCEMIA
Hypocalcemia	Hypercalcemia

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Tetany, neuromuscular irritability with weak- ness, paresthesias, fatigue, cramping, altered mental status, seizures, laryngo- spasm, and cardiac arrhythmias18,19:
• ECG changes (prolonged QT interval)
• Trousseau's sign (carpopedal spasm after arterial occlusion of an extremity for 3 minutes)
• Chvostek sign (muscle twitching on
percussion of the facial nerve)
ETIOLOGIES

Weakness, irritability, lethargy, seizures, coma, abdominal cramping, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, polyuria, polydipsia, renal calculi, pancreatitis, and ECG changes (shortened QT interval)




MANAGEMENT
Acute	Consider IV replacement (calcium
gluconate, calcium gluceptate, or calcium chloride [cardiac arrest dose])
Chronic	Consider use of oral supplements
of calcium carbonate, calcium gluconate, calcium glubionate, or calcium lactate




Ca2+, Calcium; ECG, electrocardiogram; UOP, urine output.


Increase UOP and Ca2+ excretion:
1. If the glomerular filtration rate and blood pressure are stable, give NS with mainte- nance K+ at 2-3 times the maintenance rate
2. Diuresis with furosemide
Consider hemodialysis for severe or refractory cases
Consider steroids in malignancy, granulomatous disease, and vitamin D toxicity to decrease vitamin D and Ca2+ absorption
Severe or persistently elevated Ca2+: Consider calcitonin or bisphosphonate



B. Calculate the anion gap (AG)
1. AG: Represents anions other than bicarbonate and chloride required to balance the positive charge of Na. Normal: 12 mEq/L ± 2 mEq/L.
EQUATION 11.15: AG= Na + - ( Cl - + HCO3 - )




HYPOMAGNESEMIA AND HYPERMAGNESEMIA7
Hypomagnesemia	Hypermagnesemia

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
ETIOLOGIES

GI Disorders	Genetic	Medications Miscellaneous	Renal Failure and
Excessive Administration

MANAGEMENT
Acute	IV Magnesium sulfate	Stop supplemental Mg2+

Chronic	PO Magnesium oxide or
magnesium sulfate

Diuresis
Ca2+ supplements, such as calcium chloride (cardiac arrest doses) or calcium gluconate

AD, Autosomal dominant; Ca2+, calcium; EAST, epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubulopathy; ECG,
electrocardiogram; GI, gastrointestinal; IV, intravenous; Mg2+, magnesium ; PO, by mouth.

2. The majority of unmeasured anions contributing to the AG in normal individuals are albumin and phosphate. Correcting the AG for albumin concentration increases the utility of the traditional method.19
EQUATION 11.16: Corrected AG =
                Observed AG + 2.5 × (Normal albumin - measured albumin) AG > 15 : Anion gap metabolic acidosis (AGMA)
AG < 12 : Nonelevated anion gap metabolic acidosis (NAGMA)
AG > 20 mEq / L : Primary AGMA regardless of the pH or serum HCO3- concentration




HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA AND HYPERPHOSPHATEMIA7
Hypophosphatemia	Hyperphosphatemia

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
ETIOLOGIES


MANAGEMENT
Acute	IV potassium phosphate or sodium
phosphate
Chronic	PO potassium phosphate or sodium
phosphate


Restrict dietary phosphate.
Phosphate binders (calcium carbonate, aluminum hydroxide)

BMT, Bone marrow transplant; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis. IV, intravenous; PO, by mouth.

C. Calculate the delta gap (DG)20:
If there is an AGMA, calculating the DG will help to determine if there is another, concurrent metabolic abnormality:
EQUATION 11.17: DG = ( AG - 12) - ( 24 - HCO - )
DG > 6: combined AGMA and metabolic alkalosis . DG < - 6: combined AGMA and NAGMA .
D. Calculate the osmolal gap

EQUATION 11.18: Serum osmolal gap = calculated serum osmolality
- laboratory measured osmolality




CALCULATION OF EXPECTED COMPENSATORY RESPONSE7,20
Disturbance	Primary Change  Expected Compensatory Response

Acute respiratory alkalosis	?PaCO2	?HCO3- by 2 mEq/L for each 10 mmHg fall
in PaCO2
Chronic respiratory alkalosis	?PaCO2	?HCO3- by 4 mEq/L for each 10 mmHg fall
in PaCO2
Metabolic alkalosis	?HCO3-	?PaCO2 by 7 mmHg for each 10 mEq/L rise
in HCO3-


1. There is always a difference (<6) between calculated osmolality and measured osmolality.21
2. A markedly elevated osmolar gap (>10) in the setting of an AG acidosis is highly suggestive of acute methanol or ethylene glycol intoxication.22-24
E. Calculate expected compensatory response: (Table 11.14)
1. Pure respiratory acidosis (or alkalosis): 10 mmHg rise (fall) in PaCO2 results in an average 0.08 fall (rise) in pH.
2. Pure metabolic acidosis (or alkalosis): 10 mEq/L fall (rise) in HCO -
results in an average 0.15 fall (rise) in pH.
F. Determine the likely etiology
Check for appropriate compensation
G. If there is not appropriate compensation, consider an additional acid-base derangement (Fig. 11.2)




pH < 7.35	pH > 7.45



HCO - < 20


PCO2 > 45


CO2 < 35


HCO - > 28




Urine Cl
< 15 mEq/L

Urine Cl
> 20 mEq/L





A
 FIGURE 11.2 
(A and B) Etiology of acid-base disturbances. BPD, bronchopulmonary dysplasia; CAH, congenital adrenal hyperplasia; CNS, central nervous system; COPD, chronic obstruc- tive pulmonary disease; EAST, epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubu- lopathy; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug.



 FIGURE 11.2, cont'd 


 REFERENCES	
A complete list of references can be found online at www.expertconsult.com.

 REFERENCES	
1. Holliday MA, Segar WE. The maintenance need for water in parenteral fluid therapy. Pediatrics. 1957;19(5):823-832. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.102.2.399.
2. Feld LG, Neuspiel DR, Foster BA, et al. Maintenance. Clinical practice guideline: maintenance intravenous fluids in children. Pediatrics. 2018;142(6).
3. Powers KS. Dehydration: isonatremic , hyponatremic , and hypernatremic recog- nition and management. Pediatr Rev. 2016;36:275-285.
4. Adrogué H, Madias N. Hypernatremia. N Engl J Med. 2000;342(20):1493-1499.
5. Adrogue HJ. Aiding fluid prescription for the dysnatremias. Intensive Care Med. 1997;23:309-316.
6. Adrogué H, Madias N. Hyponatremia. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1581-1589. https://doi:10.1056/NEJM200005253422107.
7. Kliegman R, Stanton B, Geme St J, Schor N, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 20th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Inc; 2016.
8. Oski F. The Principles and Practice of Pediatrics. 4th ed. Philadepphia: Saunders; 2006.
9. Moritz ML, Ayus JC. Prevention of hospital-acquired hyponatremia: a case for using isotonic saline. Pediatrics. 2003;111(2):227-230. https://doi.org/10.1542/ peds.111.2.227.
10. Moritz ML, Ayus JC. Intravenous fluid management for the acutely ill child. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2011;23(2):186-193. https://doi.org/10.1097/MOP.0b013e3283440fd9.
11. Jospe N, Forbes G. Back to basics: fluids and electrolytes-clinical aspects. Pediatr Rev Acad Pediatr. 1996;17(11):395-403. https://doi.org/10.1542/ pir.17-11-395.
12. Roberts KB. Fluid and electrolytes: parenteral fluid therapy. Pediatr Rev. 2001;22(11):380-387. https://doi.org/10.1542/pir.22-11-380.
13. Finberg L. Dehydration in infancy and childhood. Pediatr Rev. 2002;23(8):277-
282. https://doi.org/10.1542/pir.23-8-277.
14. Centor R. The hospitalist's role in the perioperative management of hyponatre- mia. Society of hospitalist medicine learning portal. https://www.shmlearningpo rtal.org/content/perioperative-management-hyponatremia. Published 2018.
15. Ranger AM, Chaudhary N, Avery M, Fraser D. Central pontine and extra- pontine myelinolysis in children: a review of 76 patients. J Child Neurol. 2012;27(8):1027-1037. https://doi.org/10.1177/0883073812445908.
16. Schwaderer AL, Schwartz GJ. Treating hypernatremic dehydration. Pediatr Rev. 2005;26(4):148-150. https://doi.org/10.1542/pir.26-4-148.
17. Haber RJ. A practical approach to acid-base disorders. Conf Rev. 1991;155:146-151.
18. Carmody JB, Norwood VF. A clinical approach to paediatric acid-base disorders. Postgrad Med J. 2012;88(1037):143-151. https://doi.org/10.1136/ postgradmedj-2011-130191.
19. Figge J, Jabor A, Kazda AFA. Anion gap and hypoalbuminemia. J Crit Care Med. 1998;26(11):1807-1810.
20. Schrier RW, ed. Renal and Electrolyte Disorders. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer; 2018.
21. Bhagat CI, Garcia-Webb P, Fletcher E, Beilby JP. Calculated vs measured plasma osmolalities revisited. Clin Chem. 1984;30(10):1703-1705.
22. Purssell RA, Pudek M, Brubacher J, Abu-Laban RB. Derivation and validation of a formula to calculate the contribution of ethanol to the osmolal gap. Ann Emerg Med. 2001;38(6):653-659. https://doi.org/10.1067/mem.2001.119455.
23. Garrard A, Sollee DR, Butterfield RC, Johannsen L, Wood A, Bertholf RL. Validation of a pre-existing formula to calculate the contribution of ethanol to

282.e2	Part II  Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information

the osmolar gap. Clin Toxicol. 2012;50(7):562-566. https://doi.org/10.3109/15563 650.2012.704039.
24. Lynd LD, Richardson KJ, Purssell RA, et al. An evaluation of the osmole gap as a screening test for toxic alcohol poisoning. BMC Emerg Med. 2008;8:1-10. https:// doi.org/10.1186/1471-227X-8-15.
25. Fleisher G, Ludwig SHF. Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Medicine. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
26. Foster BA, Tom D, Hill V. Hypotonic versus isotonic fluids in hospitalized children: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Pediatr. 2014;165(1):163-169 e2. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2014.01.040.

Chapter 12
Gastroenterology
Matthew Buendia, MD and Natalie Thoni, MD

 See additional content on Expert Consult
 I. GASTROINTESTINAL EMERGENCIES	
A. Gastrointestinal Bleeding
1. Presentation: Blood loss from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract occurs in four ways: hematemesis, hematochezia, melena, and occult bleeding.
2. Differential diagnosis of GI bleeding: Table 12.1
3. Diagnosis/Management
a. Assess airway, breathing, circulation, and hemodynamic stability.
b. Perform full physical exam, verify bleeding with rectal examination, and testing of stool or emesis for occult blood. Notable exam findings include abdominal tenderness, guarding, rebound, hepatospleno- megaly, perianal skin tags, or fissures.
c. Obtain baseline laboratory tests. Complete blood cell count (CBC), coagulation studies, type and screen, reticulocyte count, complete meta- bolic panel (CMP), C-reactive protein (CRP), and erythrocyte sedimenta- tion rate (ESR), and assess for disseminated intravascular coagulation (d dimer, fibrinogen).
d. If concerned for hemodynamic instability, begin initial fluid resuscita- tion. Consider transfusion if there is continued bleeding, symptomatic anemia, and/or a hematocrit level <21%. Initiate intravenous (IV) proton pump inhibitor (PPI).
e. Further evaluation and therapy based on the assessment and site of bleeding:
(1) Upper GI Bleeding: Consider esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and testing for Helicobacter pylori.1
(2) Lower GI Bleeding: Consider abdominal radiograph, upper GI study (± small bowel follow-through), air-contrast barium enema, colonoscopy, Meckel scan, tagged red cell scan, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance enterography (MRE). Consider stool cultures, stool ova and parasites, Clostridium dif- ficile toxin, and stool calprotectin.
B. Acute Abdomen2
1. Definition: Severe abdominal pain that may require emergency surgical intervention.
2. Differential diagnosis: Table 12.2
3. Diagnosis:
a. History: Course and characterization of the pain, emesis, melena,
hematochezia, diet, stool history, fever, travel history, menstrual




DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING
Age	Upper Gastrointestinal Tract	Lower Gastrointestinal Tract
Newborns (0-30 days)	Swallowed maternal blood	Necrotizing enterocolitis
Gastritis	Malrotation with midgut volvulusAnal fissureHirschsprung diseaseInfant (30 days-1 year)GastritisAnal fissureEsophagitisAllergic proctocolitisPeptic ulcer diseaseIntussusceptionPyloric stenosisMeckel diverticulumLymphonodular hyperplasiaIntestinal duplicationInfectious colitisHirschsprung diseasePreschool (1-5 years)GastritisJuvenile polypsEsophagitisLymphonodular hyperplasiaPeptic ulcer diseaseMeckel diverticulumEsophageal varicesHemolytic-uremic syndromeEpistaxisHenoch-Schönlein purpuraMallory-Weiss tearInfectious colitisAnal fissureSchool age and adolescenceEsophageal varicesInflammatory bowel diseasePeptic ulcer diseaseInfectious colitisEpistaxisJuvenile polypsGastritisAnal fissureMallory-Weiss tearHemorrhoidsModified from Pearl R. The approach to common abdominal diagnoses in infants and children. Part II. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1998;45:1287-1326.



ACUTE ABDOMINAL PAIN


Renal source	Urinary tract infection, pyelonephritis, and nephrolithiasis
Oncologic source	Wilms tumor, neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and lymphoma





DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF VOMITING
AgeTypically NonbiliousTypically BiliousNewborn and infantOverfeeding, physiologic reflux, milk proteinMalrotation ± volvulus,(0 days-1 year)sensitivity, pyloric stenosis, necrotizingintestinal atresia/enterocolitis, metabolic disorder, infectionstenosis, intussuscep-(GU, respiratory, GI), esophageal/intestinaltion, pancreatitisatresia/stenosis, and Hirschsprung diseasePreschoolCyclic vomiting, infectious (GI, GU), toxinMalrotation, intussuscep-(1-5 years)ingestion, diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), CNStion, incarceratedmass effect, eosinophilic esophagitis, post-hernia, pancreatitis,tussive, peptic disease, and appendicitisintestinal dysmotilitySchool age andEating disorders, pregnancy, CNS mass effect,Peritoneal adhesions,adolescenceeosinophilic esophagitis, DKA, peptic dis-malrotation, incarcer-ease, cyclic vomiting, toxins/drugs of abuse,ated hernia, pancre-infectious (GU, GI), and appendicitisatitis, and intestinaldysmotilityCNS, Central nervous system; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis; GI, gastrointestinal; GU, genitourinary.


history, vaginal/testicular symptoms, urinary symptoms, respiratory symptoms, and recent surgeries.
b. Physical Exam: Rashes, arthritis, and jaundice. Abdominal tender- ness on palpation, rebound/guarding, rigidity, masses, distention, or abnormal bowel sounds, rectal examination with stool hemoccult testing, pelvic examination (discharge, masses, adnexal/cervical motion tenderness), and genital examinations.
c. Labs: CBC, CMP, coagulation studies, lactate, type and screen, urinalysis, amylase, lipase, gonorrhea/chlamydia testing, ß-human chorionic gonadotropin (ß-hCG), ESR, and CRP.
d. Imaging: Two-view abdominal radiographs to assess for obstruction, constipation, free air, gallstones, and kidney stones. Consider chest radiograph to evaluate for pneumonia, abdominal/pelvic ultraso- nography, and abdominal CT with contrast or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
4. Management: Ensure patient is NPO and begin IV hydration. Consider nasogastric decompression, serial abdominal examinations, surgical/gynecologic/GI evaluation, pain control, and antibiotics as indicated.

A. Vomiting
1. Definition: Forceful oral expulsion of gastric contents can be bilious or nonbilious.
2. Differential Diagnosis: Table 12.3


3. Diagnosis:
a. History: Diet, medications, timing (acute vs. chronic), exposures, character (bilious, bloody, projectile) and associated symptoms. Pay special attention to vomiting without concomitant diarrhea.
b. Physical Exam: HEENT and neurologic exam with specific attention to mucus membranes, skin and dentition, as well as a thorough abdominal exam.
c. Labs: Although not always necessary, consider CMP, CBC, UA, ß- hCG, and lipase.
d. Imaging: Plain abdominal radiograph with upright view (to rule out obstruction or free air), abdominal ultrasound (US), upper GI series. Consider neurologic imaging if indicated.
4. Management: Hydration. Gastric decompression if GI obstruction suspected. Antiemetic therapy can be used in the acute setting, avoid chronic use (see Chapter 22 for discussion of antiemetic therapy). Consider surgical consultation if the vomiting is bilious.
B. Gastrointestinal Reflux Disease3
1. Definition: Gastroesophageal reflux (GER) is physiologic passage of gas- tric contents into the esophagus, and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is defined as troublesome symptoms or complications of GER.
2. Differential Diagnosis: Dysmotility including achalasia, gastroparesis, ileus, and obstruction. Inflammatory conditions such as esophagitis, gastritis/dyspepsia, peptic ulcer disease. Anatomic abnormalities such as Zenker diverticulum, tracheoesophageal fistula, vascular ring, pyloric stenosis. Functional disorders including abdominal migraines and cycli- cal vomiting syndrome. Food allergies/intolerance in infants.
3. Diagnosis:
a. History: Recurrent regurgitation, choking, vomiting, heartburn, chest pain, dysphagia, stridor or wheezing, cough, recurrent aspiration pneumonia, dental erosions, and sleep disturbances. In infants, GERD may present as irritability, weight loss, feeding refusal, or Sandifer syndrome. History is typically sufficient for diagnosis and to initiate management.
b. Testing: Esophageal pH monitoring and esophageal impedance monitoring if diagnosis unclear.4
4. Management:
a. Lifestyle: A prone or left-sided sleeping position and elevation of head of bed may improve GER symptoms in older children, but current studies for infants have been inconclusive. Infants up to 12 months should continue to sleep supine-risk of sleep-related infant death far outweighs benefit of prone or lateral sleeping in GERD. After feeds, infants should be kept upright and a trial of smaller more frequent feeds may be beneficial. Avoidance of second-hand smoke exposure.
b. Diet: Milk-thickening agents can be beneficial for symptom relief. If severe and unresponsive to conservative management, consider
2- to 4-week trial of extensively hydrolyzed protein formula in infants


or elimination of cow's milk in maternal diet to eliminate milk protein sensitivity as a cause of unexplained vomiting.
c. Pharmacotherapy: Medication is not recommended for "happy spit- ters" or infants with uncomplicated GER. Both PPIs and H2 receptor antagonists (H2RAs) are effective in relieving symptoms and promot- ing mucosal healing.5 There is insufficient evidence to support rou- tine use of prokinetic therapies (metoclopramide and erythromycin).
C. Eosinophilic Esophagitis6,7
1. Definition: A chronic, immune/antigen-mediated disease characterized by symptoms of esophageal dysfunction with ?15 eosinophils/high- power field (hpf) on esophageal biopsy.
2. Diagnosis:
a. History: Dysphagia, food impaction, chest pain, food refusal or intolerance, GER symptoms, emesis, abdominal pain, and failure to thrive. Majority of patients with EoE have concurrent atopic disorder.
b. Diagnosis: EGD with esophageal biopsies demonstrating at least 15 eos/hpf histoligically with chronic symptoms of esophageal dysfunction; Must evaluate for other causes or contributions to esophageal eosino- philia. Importantly histologic evidence without clinical correlation is not diagnostic. Per the AGREE conference, a PPI trial is no longer needed for diagnosis. Consider obtaining allergy testing (see Chapter 15).
3. Management8:
a. Dietary therapy: 6-food elimination diet (milk, wheat, eggs, soy, pea- nuts/tree nuts, seafood), elemental diet, or targeted elimination diet determined by allergy testing.
b. Pharmacotherapy: Topical swallowed steroids delivered via inhaler are preferred as first line therapy to induce remission with limited side effects (6- to 8-week course of fluticasone or budesonide metered- dose inhaler administered orally without a spacer). PPI therapy can also be trialed for initial treatment. Systemic steroids for short-term use (e.g., dysphagia leading to dehydration or weight loss). No cur- rent evidence to support routine use of biologics.
c. Complications: Symptomatic strictures requiring esophageal dilation.
D. Celiac Disease9
1. Definition: An immune-mediated inflammatory enteropathy caused by sensitivity to dietary gluten and related proteins (wheat, barley, and rye) in genetically susceptible individuals.
2. Diagnosis:
a. History: Presentation can be variable, and some patients are asymptom- atic. Most common symptoms include diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain, constipation, distention, and failure to thrive. Non-GI symptoms include rash (dermatitis herpetiformis), osteoporosis, short stature, delayed puberty, and iron deficiency anemia that is resistant to oral iron. Increased occurrence in children with autoimmune disorders, Down syndrome, Turner syndrome, William syndrome, immunoglobulin A (IgA) deficiency, and in first-degree relatives of those with celiac disease.


b. Labs: First line screening is IgA antibody to human recombinant tissue transglutaminase (TTG) and serum IgA. If known selective IgA deficiency with symptoms suggestive of celiac disease, testing with TTG IgG is recommended. CBC, iron studies, hepatic function panel, thyroid tests, calcium, and vitamin D are recommended. Additional antibody testing may be necessary for inconclusive clinical scenarios.
c. Procedures: Biopsy is "gold standard" for diagnosis. Intestinal biop- sies showing villous atrophy supports diagnosis. Results dependent on adequate consumption of gluten prior to testing; ensure 6 to 8 weeks of gluten ingestion prior to endoscopy.
3. Management: Lifetime, gluten-free diet. Annual screening with TTG is recommended to monitor adherence to diet.
4. Complications: More often seen in adulthood but at risk for vitamin defi- ciencies and other autoimmune disorders. Higher risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, specifically enteropathy associated T-cell lymphoma.
E. Inflammatory Bowel Disease (EoE)10,11
1. Classification:
a. Crohn disease: Transmural inflammatory process affecting any segment of the GI tract, most commonly terminal ileum. Commonly presents with abdominal pain, weight loss, diarrhea, and poor growth.
b. Ulcerative colitis (UC): Chronic, relapsing, inflammatory disease of the colon and rectum. Commonly presents with rectal bleeding and diarrhea.
2. Diagnosis:
a. History: Abdominal pain, weight loss, diarrhea, lethargy, nausea, vomiting, malnutrition, psychiatric symptoms, arthropathy, and rashes. Family history, exposure to infectious agents, or antibiotic treatment.
b. Physical Exam: Stomatitis, perianal skin tags, fissures, and fistulas. Assessment of hydration and nutritional status. Fever, orthostasis, tachycardia, abdominal tenderness, distention,
or masses suggests moderate to severe disease and need for hospitalization.
c. Labs: CBC, CMP, ESR, CRP. Fecal calprotectin has been shown to be elevated in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and may serve as a sensitive, noninvasive test.12 IBD often associated with anemia,
hypoalbuminemia, thrombocytosis, and elevated inflammatory mark- ers. Stool studies to exclude infectious process are necessary.
d. Imaging: MRE is the preferred imaging modality for diagnosis of pediatric IBD due to high diagnostic accuracy and no radiation exposure. CT and fluoroscopy are other alternative strategies if MRE unavailable.
e. Procedures: Diagnostic endoscopy with biopsies used to confirm diagnosis.


3. Management13-16:
a. Induction of remission:
(1) Crohn: Exclusive enteral formula-based nutrition (80%-100% caloric need by liquid formula), 5-aminosalicylates, antitumor necrosis factor (TNF) agents, and, if indicated, antibiotics or surgery. Corticosteroids can be used if necessary.
(2) UC: Corticosteroids, 5-aminosalicylates, TNF agents, and if indi- cated, antibiotics or surgery. Therapy guided by severity of illness.
b. Maintenance of remission: Immunosuppression includes thiopurines, methotrexate, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and anti-TNF monoclonal antibodies. Avoid prolonged steroid use.
c. Other: Surgical intervention indicated only after medical management has failed in both Crohn's disease and UC. In Crohn disease, surgery is indicated for localized disease (strictures), abscess, or disease refractory to medical management.
F. Constipation17
Normal stooling patterns by age: Infants 0 to 3 months, 2 to 3 bowel move- ments/day (breastfed infants may stool after every feed or go 5 to 7 days with no stool); 6 to 12 months, 1.8/day; 1 to 3 years, 1.4/day; >3 years, 1/ day. If an exclusively breastfed <1 month old is not stooling regularly, it may be a sign of insufficient milk intake; monitor weight gain.
1. Definitions:
a. Constipation: Delay or difficulty in defecation for 2 or more weeks. Functional causes of constipation are the most common. History and physical exam are often sufficient for diagnosis.
(1) Functional: Consider Rome IV Criteria (Table EC 12.A)
(2) Nonfunctional: See Table 12.4 for differential diagnosis.
2. Diagnosis:
a. History: Age of onset, toilet training experience, frequency/consis- tency/size of stools, pain or bleeding with defecation, presence of abdominal pain, soiling of underwear, stool-withholding behavior, change in appetite, abdominal distention, allergies, dietary history, medications, developmental history, psychosocial history. Refer to Bristol Stool Form Scale for classification of stool history (Fig. 12.1. Delayed meconium, poor weight gain or weight loss, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and family history (e.g., thyroid disorders, cystic fibrosis) would warrant further evaluation for nonfunctional causes.
b. Physical Exam: External perineum, perianal examination. Fecal impaction may be palpated on abdominal or digital rectal examina- tion. Plain abdominal single view radiography can be considered when physical examination is unreliable.
3. Management of functional constipation: Box 12.1 and Table EC 12.B.
a. Disimpaction:
(1) Oral/Nasogastric Approach: Polyethylene glycol (PEG) solutions are effective for initial disimpaction. May also use other osmotic laxatives.




ROME CRITERIA FOR FUNCTIONAL CONSTIPATION


1. =2 defecations in the toilet per week in child of developmental age of at least 4 years
2. At least 1 episodes of fecal incontinence per week
3. History of retentive posturing or excessive volitional stool retention
4. History of painful or hard bowel movements
5. Presence of a large fecal mass in the rectum
6. History of large diameter stools that can obstruct the toilet
Modified from Constipation Guideline Committee of the North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition. Evaluation and treatment of constipation in infants and children: Evidence-Based Recommendations from ESPGHAN and NASPGHAN. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2014;58(2):261 and Rome IV Criteria.



DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF CONSTIPATIONa



Metabolic and
gastrointestinal

Cystic fibrosis, diabetes mellitus, gluten enteropathy, hypercalcemia, hypo-
kalemia, hypothyroidism, and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B



Intestinal nerve or muscle disorders

Hirschsprung disease, intestinal neuronal dysplasia, visceral myopa- thies, and visceral neuropathies


Connective tissue disorders Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, scleroderma, and systemic lupus erythematosus
Other	Botulism, cow's milk protein intolerance, heavy metal ingestion (lead), and vitamin D intoxication

aRemember that functional constipation remains the most common cause.
Constipation Guideline Committee of the North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition. Evaluation and treatment of constipation in infants and children: Evidence-Based Recommendations from ESPGHAN and NASPGHAN. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2014;58(2):258-274.


Type 1
Separate hard lumps, like nuts (hard to pass)
Type 2
Sausage-shaped but lumpy
Type 3
Like a sausage but with cracks on the surface
Type 4
Like a sausage or snake, smooth and soft
Type 5Soft blobs with clear-cut edges
Type 6
Fluffy pieces with ragged edges, a mushy stool
Type 7
Watery, no solid pieces. Entirely liquid FIGURE 12.1 
Bristol Stool Form Scale. (From Campbell-Walsh-Wein Urology. 12th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020, Fig. 36.1.)



BOX 12.1
MANAGEMENT OF CONSTIPATION
HOME CLEANOUT INSTRUCTIONS
Step 1: Take a stimulant laxative (bisacodyl, senna) with 8 oz of liquid, as per dosing instructions below. This should be done 6 hr prior to intended effect.
Step 2: Drink polyethylene glycol (PEG). Mix with water or another clear noncarbonated liquid. Drink full amount in 2 hr. See below for dosing instructions.
Step 3: 1-2 hr after finishing PEG, should begin passing formed/thick brown stool. The stool should become thinner and clearer stooling continues.
Step 4: If not stooling or passing very thick stools 4 hr after the PEG is finished, drink 1 capful of PEG in 8 oz of liquid every hour until stools are clear.
Step 5: Cleanout is finished when stool is mostly clear with very little sand-like material mixed in. Proceed to maintenance instructions below.
DOSING INSTRUCTIONS
Weight	Polyethylene Glycol (PEG) Dose	Stimulant Laxative
Recommendation

8-10 kg	Mix 2.5 capfuls of PEG in 8 oz of clear drink
10.1-15 kg	Mix 3.5 capfuls of PEG in 16 oz of clear drink
15.1-20 kg	Mix 5 capfuls of PEG in 20 oz of clear drink
20.1-25 kg	Mix 6 capfuls of PEG in 24 oz of clear drink
25.1-30 kg	Mix 7 capfuls of PEG in 28 oz of clear drink
30.1-40 kg	Mix 9.5 capfuls of PEG in 40 oz of clear drink
40.1-50 kg	Mix 12 capfuls of PEG in 48 oz of clear drink
50.1 kg or more	Mix 14 capfuls of PEG in 56 oz of
clear drink
DAILY MAINTENANCE THERAPY

<2 years old: No stimulant laxative use
2 years to <3 years old: Chewable senna (chocolate squares)a
=3 years old: Oral chewable senna (chocolate squares) until child can swallow pills, then oral bisacodyl laxativea

The day after colon cleanse, the patient should begin taking maintenance daily PEG for continued management of constipation.
Advise patient/family to mix PEG in clear noncarbonated drink or water at least once daily. See formulary for dosing. Advise to drink the entire solution in 30 min or less for it to work well. It is best to give the PEG after school and before dinner. Do not give PEG right before bedtime.
The goal of daily maintenance PEG is for the child to have 1 or 2 soft and easily passable bowel movements every day.
Advise to have child to sit on the toilet after every meal or whenever they feel the need to stool.
aSee Formulary for dosing recommendations.
Modified from handout given to patients who visit the Johns Hopkins Children's Center Pediatric Chronic Constipation Center, as an example of constipation management; variations are found at other institutions.




PHARMACOLOGIC MANAGEMENT OF CONSTIPATION


Polyethylene Glycol (PEG)-oral	First line for disimpaction and maintenance
Magnesium Hydroxide (Milk of Magnesia)-oral

Glycerin-suppository/enema	Suppository may be used in infants <1 year old
Bisacodyl-oral/enema/suppository

STOOL SOFTENERS
Sodium Docusate-oral/enema

Modified from Management of Functional Constipation in Children: Therapy in Practice. Paediatr Drugs. 2015;17(5):349-360.

292	Part II  Diagnostic and Therapeutic Information

(2) Rectal approach: Saline or mineral oil enemas effective. Avoid enemas in infants, glycerin suppositories may be used in infants less than 1 year.
b. Maintenance therapy (usually 3 to 12 months): Goal is to prevent recurrence.
(1) Dietary changes: Evidence supporting dietary intervention is weak; however, increased intake of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and fluids other than milk is recommended.
(2) Behavioral modifications: Regular toilet habits with positive rein- forcement. Referral to a mental health specialist for motivational or behavioral concerns if soiling an issue.
(3) Medications: Daily PEG. Lactulose as second line treatment. The use of stimulant laxatives and stool softeners may also be con- sidered. Avoid prolonged use of stimulant laxatives. Discontinue therapy gradually only after return of regular bowel movements with good evacuation. Evidence does not support use of probiotics.
c. Special considerations in infants aged <1 year: 2 to 4 oz of 100% fruit juice (e.g., prune or pear) recommended in younger infants. Glycerin suppositories may be useful. While use is off label, PEG is routinely used in children <1 year of age. Avoid mineral oil, stimulant laxatives, and phosphate enemas.
G. Diarrhea18
1. Definition: Acute diarrhea is more than three loose or watery stools per day. Chronic diarrhea is diarrhea lasting more than 2 to 4 weeks.
2. Pathogenesis: It can be infectious or malabsorptive with an osmotic or secretory mechanism.
a. Osmotic diarrhea: Water is drawn into intestinal lumen by maldi- gested osmotic compounds, as seen in celiac disease, pancreatic disease, or lactose intolerance. Stool volume depends on diet and decreases with fasting (stool osmolar gap =100 mOsm/kg).
b. Secretory diarrhea: Water accompanies secreted or unabsorbed elec- trolytes into the intestinal lumen (e.g., excessive secretion of chloride ions caused by cholera toxin). Stool volume is increased and does not vary with diet (stool osmolar gap <50 mOsm/kg).
c. Stool osmolar gap: The standard value is 290 mOsm/kg.19
Stool osmolar gap =
Stool Osm - {2× [stool (Na) mEq/L + stool (K) mEq/L]}
3. Differential Diagnosis: Table 12.5
4. Diagnosis:
a. History: acute vs. chronic, travel history, recent antibiotic use, and immune status.
b. Labs: CMP, CBC, stool hemoccult testing, stool culture, C. difficile toxin, ova and parasites, and viral antigens (see Chapter 17 for com- mon bacterial and viral pathogens).




DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF COMMON CAUSES OF DIARRHEA
Diagnosis	Major Clinical Features

Lactose malabsorption	Bloating, flatulence, abdominal pain, and elevated
breath hydrogen concentration postlactose ingestion

Irritable bowel syndrome	Constipation and/or diarrhea and absence of
laboratory or imaging findings
Hirschsprung disease	Distended abdomen, abnormal barium enema, absent ganglion cells on rectal biopsy

IBD and celiac disease	See sections III.D and III.E
IBD, Inflammatory bowel disease; IgE, immunoglobulin E; UTI, urinary tract infection.
Modified from Zella GC, Israel EJ. Chronic Diarrhea in Children. Pediatrics in Review. 2012;33(5):207-218.

5. Management
a. Oral rehydration therapy (ORT)20: Enteral hydration has proven superior in reducing the length of hospital stay and adverse events.21 Parenteral hydration is indicated in severe dehydration, hemody- namic instability, or failure of ORT.
b. Diet: Restart regular diet as soon as tolerated.
c. Pharmacotherapy: No supporting evidence for use of nonspecific antidiarrheal agents, antimotility agents (e.g., loperamide), antise- cretory drugs, and toxin binders (e.g., cholestyramine). Consider evidence-based antimicrobial therapy for infectious diarrhea (see Chapter 17). If malabsorptive (e.g., celiac disease or IBD), therapy should be tailored to disease process.
d. Probiotics22: Evidence supporting use of probiotics is limited; however, their efficacy has been demonstrated in the following cir- cumstances: antibiotic-associated diarrhea, mild to moderate acute diarrhea, C. difficile diarrhea (severe recurrent disease only), hepatic encephalopathy, the prevention of atopic dermatitis, and possibly preventing necrotizing enterocolitis in premature infants.23

A. Liver Laboratory Studies: Table 12.6
1. Synthetic/Metabolic function: Albumin, prealbumin, international normalized ratio (INR), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), cholesterol levels, bilirubin, and ammonia.






LIVER LABORATORY TESTS
EnzymeSourceIncreasedDecreasedCommentsAST/ALTLiver, heart, skeletal muscle, pancreas, RBCs, and kidneyHepatocellular injury, rhabdo- myolysis, muscular dystrophy,Vitamin B6 deficiency and uremiaALT more specific than AST for liver, AST > ALT in hemolysishemolysis, and liver cancerAlkaline phosphataseOsteoblasts, liver, small intestine, kidney,Hepatocellular injury, boneLow phosphate, Wilson disease,Highest in cholestatic conditions;
and placenta

GGT	Renal tubules, bile ducts, pancreas, small intestine, and brain

growth, disease, trauma, pregnancy, and familial
Cholestasis, newborn period, and induced by drugs

zinc deficiency, hypothyroidism, and pernicious anemia
Estrogen therapy, artificially low in hyperbilirubinemia

must be differentiated from bone source
Not found in bone, increased in 90% of primary liver disease, specific for hepatobiliary dis- ease in nonpregnant patient

Ammonia	Bowel flora and protein metabolism	Hepatic disease secondary
to urea cycle dysfunction, hemodialysis, valproic acid therapy, urea cycle enzyme deficiency, organic academia, and carnitine deficiency
AST/ALT, Aspartate aminotransferase/alanine aminotransferase; GGT, ?-glutamyl transpeptidase; RBCs, red blood cells.

Converted to urea in liver






DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF ACUTE LIVER FAILURE
Infection	Herpes simplex virus, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, adenovirus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, enterovirus, human herpes virus 6, parvovirus B19, and Dengue fever
Vascular	Budd-Chiari syndrome, portal vein thrombosis, venoocclusive disease, and ischemic hepatitis

Immune Dysregulation	Natural killer cell dysfunction (hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis), autoimmune, and macrophage activation syndrome

Other	Idiopathic and cancer/leukemia

2. Liver cell injury: aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotrans- ferase (ALT), and lactate dehydrogenase.
3. Biliary system: bilirubin (total and direct), urobilinogen, ?- glutamyltransferase, and alkaline phosphatase.
B. Acute Liver Failure24,25
1. Definition: Laboratory evidence of liver injury with no known history of chronic liver disease, the presence of coagulopathy not corrected by vitamin K administration, and an INR >1.5 if patient has encephalopa- thy or >2.0 if patient does not have encephalopathy.
2. Differential Diagnosis: Table 12.7
3. Diagnosis:
a. History: Fatigue, nausea, vomiting, irritability, confusion, drowsiness, skin changes, medications, ingestion, illicit drug use, family history, developmental delay, transfusion history.
b. Physical Exam: Neurologic status, skin exam, hepatosplenomegaly, nutritional status, growth, bruising, petechiae. Slit lamp exam if concern for Wilson disease. Findings of chronic liver disease include clubbing, palmar erythema, cutaneous xanthoma, ascites, and prominent abdominal vessels.
c. Labs: Liver synthetic/metabolic function, liver cell injury, and biliary system tests (see earlier). BMP, magnesium, phosphorus, CBC with peripheral smear, reticulocyte count, ammonia, lipase. Factors V, VII (depleted first in ALF), VIII, and fibrinogen. A urine toxicology screen and a serum acetaminophen level should be obtained (see
Chapter 3). Viral hepatitis studies, autoantibodies, and evaluation for metabolic syndromes must be considered.
NOTE: See Chapter 17 for interpretation of serologic markers of hepatitis B.

d. Imaging: Abdominal US with Doppler flow. Consider head CT scan to exclude hemorrhage/edema, and chest radiography.
e. Procedures: Liver biopsy
f. Management: Evaluate for underlying cause. Consider intensive care unit (ICU) level care with close monitoring of mental status, fluid balance, metabolic disturbances, hepatorenal syndrome, sepsis, and coagulopathies. Cerebral edema is life-threatening and may require intracranial pressure monitoring. Consider liver transplant when indicated.
C. Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease26
1. Definition: Chronic liver disease from excessive fat accumulation in the liver, often secondary to insulin resistance and obesity. Most common liver disease in children in the United States.
2. Diagnosis: Screen between 9 and 11 years for obese children and overweight children with risk factors. ALT is the recommended test. If ALT persistently elevated >2 times upper limit of normal for >3 months, further evaluation is warranted. Must exclude alternative etiologies.
3. Management: Extensive lifestyle modifications, well-balanced healthy diet. No medications have proven benefit. Bariatric surgery can be con- sidered if severe comorbidities. Screen for diabetes and other comorbid conditions.
D. Hyperbilirubinemia27-29
1. Definition: Bilirubin is the product of hemoglobin metabolism. There are two forms: direct (conjugated) and indirect (unconjugated). Hyperbilirubinemia is usually the result of increased hemoglobin load, reduced hepatic uptake, reduced hepatic conjugation, or decreased excretion. Direct hyperbilirubinemia is defined as a direct bilirubin
>20% of the total bilirubin or a direct bilirubin of >2 mg/dL.
2. Differential Diagnosis: Table 12.8
3. Management: Dependent upon etiology. Evaluation and diagnosis should be guided by history; however, liver laboratory studies (see earlier) and USs are warranted in many patients. Refer to Chapter 18 for evaluation and treatment of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia.

 IV. PANCREATITIS30-32	
Definition: Inflammatory disease of the pancreas.
A. Acute Pancreatitis33
1. Diagnosis:
a. History: Abdominal pain, irritability, epigastric tenderness, nausea and vomiting. Multiple etiologies (Table 12.9). Per INSPPIRE criteria, diagnosis of acute pancreatitis requires at least two of the following:
(1) Abdominal pain compatible with acute pancreatitis
(2) Serum amylase and/or lipase values >3 times upper limit of normal
(3) Imaging findings consistent with acute pancreatitis




DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA
Transient neonatal jaundice	Breast milk jaundice and physiologic jaundice
Polycythemia and reabsorption of extravascular blood
Enterohepatic recirculation	Cystic fibrosis, Hirschsprung disease, ileal atresia, and pyloric
stenosis
Miscellaneous	Dehydration, drugs, hypoalbuminemia, sepsis, and panhypopituitarism

Biliary obstruction	Biliary atresia, choledochal cyst, fibrosing pancreatitis, gallstones
or biliary sludge, inspissated bile syndrome, neoplasm, and primary sclerosing cholangitis

Genetic/metabolic disorders	a1-Antitrypsin deficiency, Alagille syndrome, Caroli disease, cystic
fibrosis, Dubin-Johnson syndrome, galactokinase deficiency, galactosemia, glycogen storage disease, hereditary fructose intolerance, hypothyroidism, Niemann-Pick disease, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC), Rotor syndrome, tyrosinemia, and Wilson disease

Drugs	Acetaminophen, aspirin, erythromycin, ethanol, iron, isoniazid, methotrexate, parenteral nutrition, oxacillin, rifampin, steroids, sulfonamides, tetracycline, and vitamin A


b. Labs: CMP, GGT, CBC, amylase, lipase, calcium, and triglycerides.
c. Imaging: Transabdominal US recommended. CT or MRI reserved for more complicated cases depending on etiology.
2. Management:
a. Analgesia: Acetaminophen or NSAIDs as first line therapy; opiates for refractory pain.
b. Nutrition: Aggressive IV fluid hydration within initial 48 hours. Early enteral feeding recommended (within 72 hours of presentation and hemodynamically stable) and associated with shorter hospitalization and decreases comorbidity.




CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH ACUTE PANCREATITIS
Infections	Coxsackie, CMV, cryptosporidium, EBV, hepatitis, influenza A or B, leptospirosis, mycoplasma, mumps, rubella, typhoid fever, and varicella

Sepsis/peritonitis/shock
MECHANICAL/STRUCTURAL

Anatomic anomalies	Annular pancreas, choledochal cyst, pancreatic divisum, stenosis, and other

METABOLIC AND TOXIC FACTORS
Cystic fibrosis

Hypercalcemia
Hypothermia

Organic academia
CMV, Cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; IBD, inflamma- tory bowel disease.

c. Complications: Multiorgan dysfunction, shock, pseudocysts, fluid collections, and necrosis. Antibiotics reserved for infected necro- sis. Surgical consult as indicated.
B. Chronic Pancreatitis34,35
1. Diagnosis:
a. History: Abdominal pain consistent with pancreatic origin, pancre- atic insufficiency; plus consistent imaging findings or biopsy with histopathologic features. Must be distinguished from acute recurrent pancreatitis (ARP), which is defined as at least two distinct episodes of pancreatitis with complete resolution of pain or normalization of laboratory levels.
b. Labs: Same as acute pancreatitis. Normal amylase/lipase does not exclude diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis or ARP. Fecal elastase to screen for exocrine function and fat-soluble vitamins assessment. Consider genetic testing.




PROPOSED ETIOLOGIES OF CHRONIC PANCREATITIS IN CHILDHOOD
Calcific	Cystic fibrosis, hereditary pancreatitis (e.g., PRSS1 and SPINK1 mutations), hypercalcemia, hyperlipidemia, idiopathic, and juvenile tropical pancreatitis
Obstructive (noncalcific)	Congenital anomalies, idiopathic fibrosing pancreatitis, renal
disease, sclerosing cholangitis, sphincter of Oddi dysfunction, and trauma

Modified from Robertson MA. Pancreatitis. In: Walker WA et al, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal Disease. 3rd ed. New York: BC Decker; 2000:1321-1344; Werlin SL. Pancreatitis. In: McMillan JA et al, eds. Oski's Pediatrics. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006:2010-2012.

c. Imaging: Repeat imaging recommended with US and/or MRCP. Note: See Table 12.10 for proposed etiologies of chronic pancreatitis in childhood.
2. Management: (For acute exacerbations) same as management of acute pancreatitis. Maintenance to focus on nonmedication strategies, adequate nutrition for growth, nonopioids and planned opioids.

• North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and
Nutrition: www.naspghan.org
• Children's Digestive Health Information for Kids and Parents:
www.gikids.org
• Celiac Disease Foundation: clinical.celiac.org
• Rome Foundation for Diagnosis and Treatment of Functional
Gastrointestinal Disorders: www.theromefoundation.org

A complete list of references can be found online at www.expertconsult.com.














































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































